 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
  
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
August 24, 2010 
RBI releases Annual Report for 2009-10 
The Reserve Bank of India released today its Annual Report for 2009-10. This 
statutory Report of the Board of the Reserve Bank focusses on: (a) an analytical 
assessment of the key policy issues and macroeconomic challenges faced during the 
year, (b) the range of policy actions taken to address the challenges, besides initiatives 
launched during the year in relation to the broad macro-financial objectives of the 
Reserve Bank, and (c) how the operations of the Reserve Bank in pursuing the 
objectives were reflected in its financial accounts. The period since the middle of 2008-
09 has been a particularly challenging one for the Reserve Bank, as it had to contend 
with balancing the concerns relating to financial stability, growth and inflation.   
Highlights of the Report: 
Overall Assessment of the Macroeconomic and Financial Conditions 
ï Following the global financial crisis, the domestic macroeconomic environment 
changed significantly over four distinct half-yearly phases starting from the second 
half of 2008-09. Each phase posed various challenges for the Reserve Bank.  
ï First, GDP growth decelerated in the second half of 2008-09, reflecting the impact of 
the global crisis. The Reserve Bank swiftly introduced a comprehensive range of 
conventional and unconventional measures to limit the impact of the adverse global 
developments on the domestic financial system and the economy.  
ï Second, in the first half of 2009-10, weakness in the economic activity necessitated 
continuation of the monetary policy stimulus. The low (headline) inflation 
environment also created the space for continuing an accommodative monetary 
policy stance. But, by the middle of the year, a deficient South-West monsoon 
triggered renewed concerns for recovery as well as food inflation.  
ï Third, despite the dampening pulls of the deficient monsoon and an adverse global 
economic environment, growth in GDP exhibited a robust recovery ahead of the 
global economy in the second half of 2009-10. Food inflation, that had started rising 
in response to the weak kharif production, turned out to be more persistent in the 
second half of the year. Rising and increasingly generalised inflation warranted 
withdrawal of the policy stimulus. Since the policy challenge for the Reserve Bank 
was to anchor inflationary expectations without harming the recovery, a calibrated 
approach to monetary unwinding was adopted.  
ï Fourth, headline inflation remained at or close to double digits over four successive 
months of 2010-11 and the inflation process had also become more generalised. 
The balance of policy attention, thus, had to shift from recovery to inflation.  
The Near-term Outlook 
ï While the growth outlook for 2010-11 remains robust, inflation has emerged as a 
major concern. Going forward, as the monetary position is normalised, addressing 
structural constraints in several critical sectors is necessary to sustain growth and 
also contain supply side risks to inflation.   2
ï Improving the overall macro-financial environment through fiscal consolidation, a 
low and stable inflation regime, strengthening of the financial stability framework and 
progress on structural reforms will help sustain growth and boost productivity. 
ï The Reserve Bank has stated its commitment to containing inflation through its 
calibrated monetary policy normalisation, with clarity on the direction of the policy 
rates in the near-term as well as timely actions in cautious steps based on careful 
assessment of risks to both inflation and growth.  
ï The conduct of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank, while being driven by the 
domestic outlook, will have to recognise the possibility of sudden changes in the 
global outlook. While managing global shocks, India will also have to increase its 
resilience and productivity levels so as to strengthen its position in the global 
economy.  
Key Messages 
ï Since India avoided a financial crisis at home, the risk of a potential output shock is 
remote. With fiscal consolidation, favourable demography and further structural 
reforms, the potential growth could be raised to double digit level.  
ï While the performance of agriculture sector in 2009-10 in the face of a deficient 
monsoon has been better than in previous drought episodes, concerns still remain 
over the ability to withstand successive years of drought. 
ï The impact of a deficient monsoon on growth is weakening, whereas the impact on 
inflation continues to be significant.  
ï The average growth rate of foodgrains production at 1.6 per cent during 1990-2010 
has trailed behind the average population growth of 1.9 per cent. 
ï The aggregate savings rate moderated in 2008-09, reflecting a sharp fall in public 
sector savings on account of the impact of the fiscal stimulus measures. Preliminary 
estimates based on the latest available information place financial savings (net) of 
the household sector in 2009-10 at 11.9 per cent of GDP at current market prices, 
which is higher than the estimates for 2008-09 at 10.2 per cent. 
ï Large divergence between inflation as measured by wholesale and consumer price 
indices was a major feature of inflation trends in India during 2009-10. The 
differences in inflation across states have also been significant. 
ï Despite the persisting ambiguity about the relationship between futures market 
activities and spot prices of commodities, activities in the futures market need to be 
better monitored, given the possible role this market may have for the overall 
inflation conditions.  
ï The identification of sources of inflation is important for the conduct of monetary 
policy. When the inflationary pressures are dominated by adverse supply shocks, 
monetary policy could be less effective in containing price pressures. 
ï Since November 2009, the relative price variability has declined, despite inflation 
remaining high, indicating that the inflation has become increasingly generalised, 
and hence, requiring appropriate monetary policy actions to anchor inflation 
expectations.  
ï The financial markets functioned smoothly during 2009-10 reflecting the stabilising 
operations of the Reserve Bank in various segments of the markets as also the 
sound regulatory framework put in place prior to the global crisis. 
ï The large market borrowing by the Government exerted upward pressure on the 
yields on government securities during 2009-10. However, this was contained by 
active liquidity management by the Reserve Bank.   3
ï Housing prices rebounded during 2009-10. The exchange rate exhibited greater 
flexibility. 
ï Persistent large fiscal deficit has several adverse macroeconomic risks, ranging 
from higher inflation to lower savings, crowding-out pressures on private investment, 
decline in potential output, and worsening of external imbalances.  
ï While these concerns may be absent in the short-term in a phase of economic 
slowdown that requires the use of fiscal stimulus, in the medium-term these risks 
may materialise if the fiscal deficit is not brought down significantly under a credible 
fiscal consolidation strategy. 
ï In a globalised world, a congenial global economic environment and a sustainable 
balance of payments position are critical for achieving the policy goal of stable 
growth. 
ï Despite lower trade deficit, the decline in invisibles surplus led to a higher current 
account deficit of 2.9 per cent of GDP during 2009-10 as compared with 2.4 per cent 
of GDP a year ago. A higher current account deficit led to stronger absorption of 
foreign capital.  
ï Capital flows in the initial months of 2010-11 moderated somewhat, reflecting the 
drop in risk appetite of global investors in response to the sovereign risk concerns in 
the Euro zone. Given the stronger growth outlook of India and the probability of 
monetary exit being delayed by the advanced economies, capital inflows could be 
expected to accelerate, which will have to be managed, as in the past. 
ï India faces the daunting challenge of stepping up the growth potential by bringing 
the financially excluded within the ambit of the formal financial system, providing 
financial literacy and strengthening credit delivery mechanisms which, in turn, could 
improve the distribution of the benefits of high growth. 
ï Sound regulatory and supervisory framework for banks and non-banking financial 
entities proved crucial in containing the impact of the contagion from the global 
financial crisis on the Indian financial system. During 2009-10, several steps were 
taken to further strengthen the financial stability framework. 
ï Critical financial soundness indicators (FSIs) and stress test results suggested that 
the financial system remains sound and resilient.  
ï The borrowing programme for 2010-11 has to be managed, keeping in view the 
pressure on yield from the elevated inflation, gradual withdrawal of excess liquidity 
and stronger pick-up in the private sector credit demand.  
ï Reflecting the Reserve Bankís clean note policy, there was larger withdrawal of 
soiled notes from circulation alongside higher supply of fresh notes. 
ï Counterfeit notes detected during 2009-10 were of the same magnitude as in the 
previous year. The systems for prevention and detection of counterfeit notes are 
being strengthened on a continuous basis. 
The Reserve Bankís Accounts for 2009-10 (July-June) 
ï The balance sheet of the Reserve Bank was managed prudently, and the asset and 
liability side developments reflected the result of operations of the Bank undertaken 
during the year in pursuit of its broad macroeconomic and financial sector 
objectives. 
ï On the liability side, there was a high growth in notes in circulation, banksí deposits 
with the Reserve Bank due to the policy driven increases in CRR as well as deposit 
growth in the banking system and the Central Governmentís deposits with the 
Reserve Bank. The outstanding balances maintained by the Central Government 
under the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS), however, declined.  4
ï On the asset side, there was significant increase in Bankís portfolio of domestic 
assets in the form of government securities parked by the banks with the Reserve 
Bank for availing funds under repo. Foreign currency assets declined largely due to 
valuation effect and use of a part of such assets for purchase of gold from the IMF. 
ï The gross income of the Reserve Bank for the year 2009-10 declined. As return on 
foreign assets tracked the near zero policy rates maintained by the central banks of 
the advanced economies, income on such assets declined significantly. In monetary 
operations, sustained period of large net absorption of liquidity through reverse repo 
also involved higher net interest outgo. 
Near to Medium-term Challenges for the Reserve Bank 
Monetary Policy Response to Supply Shocks 
ï Repeated supply shocks pose a constant challenge to ensuring a low inflation 
regime in India, which is necessary for achieving inclusive high growth. A medium-
term approach is required to augment the supply by addressing structural supply 
constraints, particularly in items of mass consumption. 
Improving Monetary Policy Transmission 
ï In India, since the financial system did not face a crisis, the damage to the 
transmission channel was minimal, even though the pre-global crisis time structural 
rigidities continued to limit the effectiveness of Reserve Bankís monetary policy 
actions. The recent switch over to the new ìbase rateî system is expected to help in 
improving and enhancing the visibility of the transmission of monetary policy signals 
to credit markets. 
Fiscal Space for Increasing the Flexibility of Monetary Policy 
ï Persistence of fiscal imbalances over extended periods tends to increase risks to 
inflation through money-financed pressures on aggregate demand, interest rates 
through crowding-out pressures, and exchange rate through the twin deficit channel. 
The fiscal space in India is critical not only for the usual output stabilisation 
requirements around a high growth path, but also for limiting the impact of 
temporary but large supply shocks on headline inflation.  
Capital Flows ñ Managing Surges and Sudden Stops 
ï Volatile capital flows have been a potential source of instability for Emerging Market 
Economies. Costs could magnify for an economy during periods of both too little and 
too much of capital flows, unless they are managed judiciously. India, in recent 
years, had to manage phases characterised by large net inflows as well as sudden 
outflows in the midst of a global crisis.  
ï A judicious mix of flexible exchange rate, sterilisation of the impact of inflows on 
domestic liquidity, cautious approach to liberalisation of the capital account, and the 
cushion of foreign exchange reserves has been used to deal with the adverse 
ramifications of capital flows. 
Financing of Infrastructure 
ï The infrastructure gap of India, both in relation to other major countries and its own 
growing demand, has been a key factor affecting the overall productivity of 
investments. The requirement of high initial capital outlay, that too over longer 
terms, necessitates measures to address the financing constraint to capacity 
expansion in infrastructure. 
ï Bank credit to the infrastructure sector witnessed significant growth during last ten 
years, taking the share of bank finance to infrastructure in gross bank credit from 
about 2 per cent to more than 12 per cent. While banks continue to be a prime 
source of financing for infrastructure projects, alternative non-banking financing has  5
to be attracted with appropriate policies to be able to address the financing 
constraint to growth in infrastructure.  
Financial Inclusion ñ Strengthening the Contribution of Finance to Sustainable 
Growth 
ï The potential of the financial system has not been harnessed fully due to the extent 
of financial exclusion prevailing today. The Reserve Bank has significantly scaled up 
its efforts aimed at increasing the level of penetration of bank financing in the 
economy. Financial inclusion represents a critical component of the policy process 
that intends to make the financial system serve the needs of the real economy. 
Financial Sector Reforms ñ What Next? 
ï Since the global crisis, there has been a decisive shift in trend towards assigning 
increased responsibility to the central banks for both ìsystemic oversightî and 
ìmacro-prudential regulationî. This greater responsibility is driven by the capability 
of the central banks among regulators and public institutions to perform the intended 
task. In order for the Reserve Bank to effectively discharge such responsibilities, the 
issue of institutional independence and autonomy becomes important. 
ï Going forward, three areas will continue to be important in policy debates, i.e., 
development of long-term corporate bond markets, derivative markets to facilitate 
better price discovery and risk transfers, and more competition by allowing greater 
foreign participation.   
Systemic Stability Risks ñ The New Regulatory Architecture for the Financial 
System 
ï Much of the challenges in the domain of financial stability regulation would arise 
from complexities surrounding the assessment of systemic risk, interconnectedness, 
common exposures, risk concentrations in complex innovative products and use of 
models to manage and price risks which at times mask information. 
ï Countries like India are yet to fully benefit from the financial system in harnessing 
the growth potential and achieving various developmental objectives. Any regulatory 
actions that may limit the flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy 
would clearly bring to the fore the trade-off between stability and growth. 
Globalisation-induced Challenges to Monetary and Financial Sector Policies 
ï The global crisis revealed how countries are interlinked beyond the conventional 
channels of trade and capital flows. Globalisation will continue to be a source of 
opportunity to maximise the countryís growth potential, but there would be 
increasing pressures on current comparative advantages of India, besides raising 
the scope for faster transmission of shocks from the global economy to the domestic 
economy. 
ï Sound domestic policy environment is increasingly more important to minimise the 
impact of global shocks on domestic real economy. Past experience shows that 
some of the global shocks will emerge suddenly as black swans, and hence, policy 
space must be created and preserved at every stage to deal with such shocks.  
 
 
 
  Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2010-2011/286             Chief General Manager 