 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
  
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
November 2, 2010 
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2010-11 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
"This morning, the Reserve Bank released its Second Quarter Review of 
Monetary Policy for 2010-11. At the heart of the policy was a further increase in the 
repo and reverse repo rates by 25 basis points each. Accordingly, the repo rate stands 
raised to 6.25 per cent and the reverse repo rate to 5.25 per cent. The cash reserve 
ratio (CRR) has been left unchanged at 6 per cent of net demand and time liabilities 
(NDTL) of banks.  
2. With this increase, since we started reversing the monetary policy stance in 
March 2010, the repo rate has increased by 150 basis points and the reverse repo by 
200 basis points. 
Considerations Behind Policy Move
3. As always, we had taken into account both global and domestic macroeconomic 
situation in calibrating this policy move. In particular, we were guided by three 
considerations. 
i) Domestic growth drivers are robust which should help absorb to a large 
extent the negative impact of any slowdown in global recovery. 
ii) Inflation and inflationary expectations remain high as both demand side and 
supply side factors are at play. Given the spread and persistence of inflation, 
demand-side inflationary pressures need to be contained and inflationary 
expectations anchored.  
iii) Even though a liquidity deficit is consistent with our anti-inflation stance, it 
needs to be contained within a reasonable limit to ensure that economic 
activity is not disrupted. 
Global Outlook
4. To start with, a brief comment on the global economy. The fragile and uneven 
nature of the recovery and large unemployment in advanced economies raise concerns 
about the sustainability of the global turn around. The slowing momentum of recovery 
has prompted the central banks of some advanced economies to initiate (or consider 
initiating) a second round of quantitative easing to further stimulate private demand. 
While the ultra loose monetary policy of advanced economies may benefit the global 
economy in the medium-term, in the short-term it will trigger further capital inflows into 
emerging market economies (EMEs) and put upward pressure on global commodity 
prices. 
 
 
Indian Economy 2
Growth  
5. Turning to domestic outlook, the economy is operating close to the trend growth 
rate, driven mainly by domestic factors. The normal South-West monsoon and its 
delayed withdrawal have boosted the prospects of both kharif and rabi agricultural 
production which should also stimulate rural demand. Most industrial and service sector 
indicators also point towards sustained growth.  
6. Taking into account the good performance of the agriculture sector, and a range 
of indicators of industrial production and service sector activity, the baseline projection 
of real GDP growth for 2010-11, for policy purposes, is retained at 8.5 per cent. 
Inflation
7. Let me now move to the vital issue of inflation conditions. Notwithstanding some 
moderation in recent months, headline inflation remains significantly above its medium-
term trend, and well above the comfort zone of the Reserve Bank. Food inflation has 
not shown the expected post-monsoon moderation and has remained persistently 
elevated for over an year now, reflecting in part the structural demand-supply 
mismatches in several commodities. This has elevated inflation expectations. The risks 
of expectations spilling over into prices of other commodities are significant when the 
economy is growing close to trend. That could potentially offset the recent moderation.  
8. Even as non-food manufacturing inflation has moderated, it remains above its 
medium-term trend. The new WPI series released in September 2010 is a better 
representative of commodity price levels with an updated base (2004-05=100) and 
wider coverage of commodities. When we compare the old and new WPI series, 
inflation at the aggregate level over the medium-term is similar under both series, but 
there are differences at a disaggregated level. Inflation in primary articles, especially 
food articles, in the new series has been significantly higher than in the old series, 
whereas for manufactured products, it has been somewhat lower.  
9. Going forward, the inflation outlook will be shaped by three factors: (i) the 
evolution of food price inflation; (ii) global commodity prices; and (iii) demand pressures 
stemming from sustained growth amidst tightening capacity constraints in many 
industries.  
10. On balance, inflation is expected to moderate from the present elevated level, 
reflecting in part, some easing of supply constraints and concerted policy action. In its 
July Review, the Reserve Bank made a baseline projection of WPI inflation for March 
2011 of 6 per cent under the old series of WPI. The baseline projection of WPI inflation 
for March 2011 has been placed at 5.5 per cent under the new series. This is 
equivalent to 6 per cent under the old series. Effectively, this means that the Reserve 
Bankís inflation projection remains unchanged from that made in its July 2010 Review. 
Monetary and Liquidity Aggregates
11. The overall liquidity situation has been in the news over the last few weeks. Let 
me explain the evolving situation and the underlying dynamics. 
12. The present tight liquidity is a result of both structural and frictional factors.  On 
the structural side, the deposit growth rate of the banking system has been sluggish 
even as the credit growth improved.  On the frictional side, government cash balances 
had built up as a result of more than anticipated tax receipts.  On top of it, there were 
large capital outflows on account of refund of over-subscription of Coal India IPO. 
13. Tight liquidity conditions are admittedly desirable from the viewpoint of inflation 
management, but there are legitimate concerns about the deficit as the injection 
through the LAF window had become too large in recent weeks, in excess of the 
Reserve Bankís comfort zone of (+/-) 1 per cent of NDTL  3
14. With a view to alleviating the frictional liquidity pressure, the Reserve 
Bank decided to conduct a second LAF (SLAF) on a daily basis and also allowed banks 
to avail additional liquidity support under the LAF to the extent of up to 1 per cent of 
their NDTL up to November 4, 2010. In order to address the structural liquidity problem, 
earlier today, the Reserve Bank announced an OMO for purchase of government 
securities amounting to `12,000 crore.  
15. In view of the current assessment of the growth-inflation dynamics, It is expected 
that monetary aggregates will evolve along the projected trajectory indicated in our July 
Review. Accordingly, for policy purposes, we have retained the earlier projections of 
money supply (M ) at 17 per cent and of non-food bank credit growth at 20 per cent. As 
3
always, these numbers are indicative projections and not targets. 
External Sector 
16. Let me now move to external sector management which has assumed a lot of 
importance in the recent period owing to global developments. The current account 
deficit in the balance of payments widened in the first quarter of 2010-11. If the current 
trend persists, the current account deficit as a percentage of GDP for the full year will 
be significantly higher than in last year. It is generally perceived that a current account 
deficit above 3 per cent of GDP is difficult to sustain over the medium-term. The 
challenge, therefore, is to rein in the deficit over the medium-term and finance it in the 
short-term. The medium-term task has to receive policy focus from both the 
Government and the Reserve Bank. The short term task is to see that the current 
account is fully financed while ensuring that capital flows are not far out of line with the 
economyís absorptive capacity and that the component of long-term and stable flows in 
the overall capital flows is high.  
Capital Flows 
17. In the context of todayís increases in policy rates, let me now turn to another 
important issue. It has often been argued that the widening of interest rate differential 
between the domestic and international markets will result in increased debt-creating 
capital flows. While it is true that large interest rate differential makes investment in 
domestic debt instruments and external borrowings by domestic entities more 
attractive, we need to keep in view three aspects in the Indian context. First, the 
economyís capacity to absorb capital flows has expanded as reflected in the widening 
of the current account deficit. Second, despite the already large differential between 
domestic and international interest rates, capital flows in the recent period have been 
predominantly in the form of portfolio flows into the equity market. This suggests that 
the interest rate differential is not the only factor that influences capital flows. Third, in 
line with our policy of preferring equity to debt-creating flows, we still maintain some 
controls in respect of debt flows. 
Risk Factors
18. Let me indicate some of the important risks to the growth and inflation outlook.  
ï First, the main downside risk to growth emanates from the prospects of a 
prolonged, slow and halting recovery in advanced economies which would 
adversely affect the growth performance of EMEs, including India. 
ï Second, inflationary pressures may accentuate due to the structural component 
in food inflation while demand side pressures may accentuate due to capacity 
constraints in many industries and rising global commodity prices. 
ï Third, given the weak recovery, some advanced economies are in the process of 
resorting to another round of quantitative easing that could trigger capital flows 
into EMEs, including India. Large capital flows beyond the absorptive capacity of  4
the economy could pose a major challenge for exchange rate and 
monetary management. 
ï Fourth, the widening of the current account deficit raises concerns given the 
uncertainty associated with international capital flows. 
ï Fifth, asset prices in India, as in many other EMEs, have risen sharply in a short 
time which is a cause for concern. 
Monetary Policy Stance  
19. The current stance of monetary policy is intended to: 
ï Contain inflation and anchor inflationary expectations, while being prepared to 
respond to any further build-up of inflationary pressures. 
ï Maintain an interest rate regime consistent with price, output and financial 
stability. 
ï Actively manage liquidity to ensure that it remains broadly in balance, with 
neither a surplus diluting monetary transmission nor a deficit choking 
off fund flows. 
Expected Outcomes 
20. Todayís monetary policy actions are expected to:  
ï Sustain the anti-inflationary thrust of recent monetary actions and outcomes in 
the face of persistent inflation risks. 
ï Rein in rising inflationary expectations which may be aggravated by the 
structural nature of food price increases. 
ï Be moderate enough not to disrupt growth. 
21. Let me reiterate that the exit from expansionary monetary policy since October 
2009 has been calibrated on the basis of Indiaís specific growth-inflation dynamics in 
the broader context of persistent global uncertainty. The Reserve Bank will continue to 
closely monitor both global and domestic macroeconomic conditions.  We will take 
action as warranted with a view to mitigating any potentially disruptive effects of lumpy 
and volatile capital flows and sharp movements in domestic liquidity conditions, 
consistent with the broad objectives of price and output stability. 
22. Based purely on current growth and inflation trends, the Reserve Bank believes 
that the likelihood of further rate actions in the immediate future is relatively low. 
However, in an uncertain world, we need to be prepared to respond appropriately to 
shocks that may emanate from either global or domestic environment. 
Developmental and Regulatory Polices 
23. Let me now turn to developmental and regulatory issues. The thrust of the 
regulation by the Reserve Bank in recent years has not only been on strengthening the 
financial system, but also on developing financial markets, promoting financial 
inclusion, improving credit delivery, especially to the SME sector, improving customer  
service and strengthening the payment and settlement systems. The Reserve Bank, 
therefore, will continue to pursue reforms in these areas so as to enhance the efficiency 
and stability of the financial system.    
24. I will highlight a few measures, we have taken or plan to take in these areas.  
Financial Stability  
ï Releasing the second financial stability report in December 2010. Going forward, 
financial stability report will be published in June and December every year.   5
Interest Rates  
ï Preparing a discussion paper, which will delineate the pros and cons of 
deregulating the savings bank deposits interest rate.  
Financial Market Products  
ï Permitting settlement of repo in corporate bonds on a T+0 basis in addition to 
the existing T+1 and T+2 basis.   
Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion  
ï Allowing regional rural banks (RRBs) to open branches in tier 3 to tier 6 centres 
as identified in the Census 2001(with population up to 49,999), subject to 
fulfilling certain conditions.  
ï Opening sub-offices of the Reserve Bank in the remaining six states of the North 
East, viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and 
Meghalaya, in a phased manner. 
ï Initiating several measures to strengthen the role of urban co-operation banks 
(UCBs) such as: 
(i) extending area of their operations;  
(ii) liberalising branch licensing policy for well managed and financially sound 
UCBs;  
(iii) allowing well managed and financially sound UCBs to engage business 
correspondents (BCs)/business facilitators (BFs);  
(iv) allowing licensed UCBs the facility of INFINET membership, current and 
SGL accounts with the Reserve Bank; and  
(v) allowing RTGS membership to well managed and financially sound UCBs 
having a minimum net worth of ` 25 crore. 
Regulatory Measures  
ï Prescribing the loan to value (LTV) ratio of not exceeding 80 per cent in respect 
of housing loans hereafter.   
ï Increasing the risk weight for residential housing loans of ` 75 lakh and above, 
irrespective of the LTV, to 125 per cent. 
ï Increase the standard asset provisioning by commercial banks for all housing 
loans with teaser rates to 2 per cent.   
ï Stipulating prudential limits to regulate the investments of banks in companies 
engaged in forms of business other than financial services. Banks will be 
required to review their investments in such companies and be compliant with 
the guidelines as per the roadmap to be laid down. 
ï Implementing the recommendations of the Internal Group on Supervision of 
Financial Conglomerates (FCs) on (i) capital adequacy for FCs; and (ii) intra-
group transactions and exposures in FCs.  
ï Taking appropriate steps to fully align the corporate governance practices in 
banks in India with the principles enunciated by the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision (BCBS). 
ï Issuing final guidelines on compensation practices by banks by end-December 
2010.  
ï Putting the draft guidelines on licensing of new banks in public domain by end-
January 2011 for public comments. 
Institutional Measures   6
ï Increasing the threshold limit for real time gross settlement system 
(RTGS) transactions from the present limit of ` 1 lakh to ` 2 lakh. 
ï Accepting the report of the Group on next generation RTGS. 
ï Planning the next roll out of cheque truncation system in March 2011 at Chennai. 
Discussions with banks  
25. Banks welcomed the Reserve Bankís policy stance. They agreed that the 
monetary measures announced by the Reserve Bank today were appropriate in the 
current domestic growth-inflation dynamics. Apart from monetary measures, 
discussions with banks focused on four specific issues, i.e., (i) liquidity situation; (ii) 
housing credit, price and risk; (iii) customer service; and (iv) external sector 
management. While appreciating the liquidity easing measurers announced recently, 
banks indicated that steps are required to ease structural liquidity. Welcoming the 
stipulation of the loan to value ratio and increased risk weight in housing loans, some 
banks felt that the practice of offering lower interest rates in the initial period of housing 
loans cannot be equated with teaser loans as the risk in such loans is not different from 
those offered at floating rate loans. Banks reiterated that they will continue to strive for 
improved customer service. Banks shared the Reserve Bankís concern that the 
component of stable capital flows in the overall flows should be increased to address 
the concerns of financing the widening current account deficit." 
 
 
Ajit Prasad 
Press Release : 2010-2011/615             Assistant General Manager 
 
 
 
 