he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
January 28, 2010 
 
Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments:  
Third Quarter Review 2009-10 
 
The Reserve Bank of India today released the document Macroeconomic and 
Monetary Developments: Third Quarter Review 2009-10, which serves as a 
background to the Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2009-10 to be 
announced on January 29, 2010. 
 
Highlights 
Global Economic Conditions 
ï The global outlook improved significantly in the third quarter of 2009, with 
most advanced economies posting positive growth.  
 
ï The IMF, in its January 2010 update, has revised significantly the global 
growth outlook for 2010 (from the earlier projected 3.1 per cent to 3.9 per 
cent). Recovery in advanced economies is, however, expected to remain 
sluggish, while economic activity in emerging market economies (EMEs) and 
developing economies could expand vigorously, driven by domestic demand.  
 
ï The pace and shape of recovery continue to remain uncertain. By far the 
biggest anxiety is about the recovery losing momentum once the props of 
fiscal stimulus and monetary accommodation are withdrawn.  
 
ï In advanced economies, there are concerns about higher unemployment 
levels, growing fiscal deficits and continued credit recession to productive 
sectors.  
 
ï Emerging economies, which are already on the recovery path, face various 
challenges from capital flows, potential inflationary pressures and credit 
revival.  
 
ï While the short-term debate is centered around the timing and sequencing of 
exit policies, several medium-term issues have come to the fore. These 
include the growing debt burden of Governments, permanent loss of output 
owing to capital destruction, addressing global imbalances and reforming the 
regulatory architectures. 
 
Indian Economy 
Output 
 
ï At 7.9 per cent, GDP growth in the second quarter of 2009-10 showed 
continuation of the recovery witnessed in the first quarter.  
 2 
 
ï Agriculture and allied activities registered a better than expected growth of 0.9 
per cent. However, this reflects only a part of the overall adverse impact of the 
deficient south-west monsoon on kharif output.  
 
ï According to the first advance estimates, production of kharif foodgrains and 
oilseeds is expected to decline by about 16 per cent over the previous year. 
 
ï Strong industrial recovery has been the key underlying strength behind the 
recovery of GDP in the second quarter. The core infrastructure sector also 
exhibited stronger growth during April-December 2009. 
 
ï Services activities (accounting for 64.5 per cent of the GDP) registered a 
growth of 9.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2009-10. The recovery was 
largely driven by 12.7 per cent growth in ìcommunity, social and personal 
servicesî reflecting payouts of arrears relating to the Sixth Pay Commission 
award. Excluding the arrears, the services sector growth would have been 7.0 
per cent during the second quarter of 2009-10.  
 
ï Lead indicators for services activities suggest that services dependent on 
domestic demand exhibited robust growth during April-December 2009, and  
services dependent on external demand have also shown some improvement 
in recent months.  
 
Aggregate Demand 
ï Sharp deceleration in the growth of private consumption demand to 1.6 per 
cent in the first quarter of 2009-10 - in addition to subdued growth in 
investment demand - had emerged as the key constraint to a faster recovery 
in GDP growth.  
 
ï In the second quarter of 2009-10, however, private consumption demand 
registered a growth of 5.6 per cent, which is the highest in last six quarters.  
 
ï Investment demand, in terms of growth in gross fixed capital formation, also 
exhibited a growth of 7.3 per cent, which is the highest in the last four 
quarters. Adjusted for the decline in inventories in the second quarter, 
however, the growth was moderate.  
 
ï Growth in government consumption expenditure, which had to offset the 
impact of deceleration in private demand on economic growth in the wake of 
the global recession, continues to outpace growth in private demand in the 
last four quarters.  
 
ï In the second quarter of 2009-10, government consumption expenditure 
increased by 27 per cent, which is partly on account of the payment of arrears 
relating to the Sixth Pay Commission Award.  
 
ï Corporate performance data  up to the second quarter of 2009-10 indicate that 
despite the persistence of dampened (y-on-y) growth in sales, sequential 
quarterly growth remained positive. In the third quarter of 2009-10, partial data 
indicate significant (Y-o-Y) growth in sales.  
 
External Economy 
ï Merchandise exports registered a positive growth of 18.2 per cent in 
November 2009 after a phase of decline over thirteen consecutive months 
and the pace of decline in imports also moderated significantly to 2.6 per cent.  
 3 
 
ï The current account deficit in the balance of payments in the second quarter 
of 2009-10 remained at the same level as in the corresponding period of last 
year.  
 
ï Signs of resumption in capital inflows that were evident in the first quarter of 
2009-10, improved significantly in the second quarter. Latest information on 
specific components of capital flows suggests that even in the third quarter of 
2009-10, net inflows sustained the revival.  
 
ï Due to allocation of SDRs by the IMF and purchase of gold by the Reserve 
Bank from the IMF, the level and composition of the countryís foreign 
exchange reserves have changed in the recent period. It increased from US$ 
252 billion at end-March 2009 to US$ 285.2 billion as on January 15, 2010.  
 
ï In the context of the expected surge in capital flows to EMEs, assessment and 
monitoring of the macroeconomic ramifications of large capital inflows would 
be a challenge. 
 
Monetary Conditions 
ï The overall monetary and liquidity conditions prevailing in the system reflected 
the accommodative monetary policy stance of the Reserve Bank. This stance, 
so far, has remained geared towards meeting the goals of supporting a 
stronger recovery in growth while ensuring completion of the large borrowing 
programme of the Government without exerting pressures on the overall 
interest rate structure.  
 
ï Broad money (M ) growth exhibited some moderation in recent months and 
3
was at 16.5 per cent as on January 15, 2010, as against the indicative money 
growth projection of 17.0 per cent presented in the Second Quarter Review of 
Monetary Policy 2009-10.  
 
ï On the component side of money growth, deposit growth of scheduled 
commercial banks at 16.8 per cent was lower than the 18.0 per cent indicative 
projection in the Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2009-10. There 
was a noticeable shift in the composition of deposits - growth in time deposits 
decelerated, partly reflecting the decline in time deposit interest rates during 
the year.  
 
ï On the sources side of money growth, as the banking systemís growth in 
credit to the private sector decelerated, credit to the Government remained 
the key driver of money growth. Since the third quarter of 2009-10, however, 
growth in commercial banksí credit to the Government has also moderated.  
 
ï Non-food credit growth, which decelerated over twelve months following the 
peak in October 2008, has shown a reversal in the trend since November 
2009. Non-food credit growth of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) at 14.4 
per cent as on January 15, 2010 remains lower than both 21.9 per cent 
growth seen in the corresponding period of last year and 18.0 per cent 
indicative growth presented in the Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 
2009-10. 
 
ï Availability of resources from the nonbanking sources increased significantly 
by about Rs.50, 000 crore during April-January 2009-10, primarily in the form 
of IPOs, private placements, net issuance of CPs by corporates, and inflows 
under foreign direct investment.  
 4 
 
ï Pattern of capital flows, pace of the recovery in demand for credit from the 
private sector and the fiscal stance would influence the monetary and liquidity 
conditions in the near term. 
 
Financial Markets 
ï The financial markets in India remained orderly and reflected the overall 
expectations of stronger recovery in the economy, the impact of higher capital 
inflows, and the overriding influence of the accommodative monetary policy 
stance of the Reserve Bank.  
 
ï Money market rates remained well anchored within the LAF corridor, and in 
the CBLO market, which accounts for about 80 per cent of the volume in the 
money market, the rates remained below the call money rates.  
 
ï Over 98 per cent of the net market borrowing programme of the Central 
Government has been completed so far.  
 
ï In the secondary market, the yield on government securities exhibited some 
hardening in the recent months, reflecting large supply of government 
securities and emerging inflationary pressures.  
 
ï In the credit market, both deposit and lending rates showed moderation, 
reflecting lagged transmission of the policy rate changes of the Reserve Bank.  
 
ï Stock markets, though volatile, sustained the gains of previous months. 
Among the EMEs, India was one of the strongest performers.  
 
ï In the primary market, activities picked up in terms of IPOs and private 
placements. Net mobilisation by the mutual funds exhibited significant 
increase.  
 
ï With the return of capital inflows, and the resultant surplus  conditions in the 
forex market, the Indian rupee appreciated against major international 
currencies.  
 
Inflation Situation 
ï Inflation emerged as a major concern during the third quarter, dominated by 
significant supply factors.  
 
ï On year on year basis, WPI headline inflation in December 2009 was at 7.3 
per cent, whereas WPI inflation excluding food articles was 2.1 per cent, 
which suggests the concentrated nature of the inflation so far.  
 
ï Food items (i.e. primary and manufactured) with a combined weight of 27 per 
cent in the WPI basket have exhibited 21.9 per cent increase in prices.  
 
ï In December 2009, there have been signs of emergence of generalised 
inflation.  
 
ï Weekly WPI data on primary articles indicate that primary food articles prices 
have increased by 17.4 per cent (y-o-y) for the week ending on January 16, 
2010. 
 
ï The concentrated pressure on headline inflation arising from high food prices 
entails the risk of getting transmitted over time to other non-food items 
through expectations driven wage price revisions, and thereby magnifying into 
a generalised inflation.  
 5 
 
ï While anchoring inflation expectations becomes important in such a situation, 
addressing supply constraints would be critical for enhancing the 
effectiveness of any anti-inflationary policy measures. 
 
Growth and Inflation Outlook 
ï In view of the dominance of food price inflation, balancing the policy needs of 
supporting durable return to the high growth path while avoiding a situation of 
generalised increase in inflation through monetary policy actions has emerged 
as a delicate challenge for the Reserve Bank. 
 
ï The upside prospects for further acceleration in growth in the near term derive 
support from several factors, including signs of revival in private demand, both 
consumption and investment; possibility of strong industrial recovery 
continuing; outlook for a better Rabi crop; export growth remaining positive; 
favourable capital market conditions; and the general improvement in 
business sentiments as per the Reserve Bankís business expectations survey 
as well as similar surveys of other agencies.  
 
ï According to the Reserve Bankís Professional Forecasters Survey conducted 
in December 2009, the outlook for 2009-10 growth has been revised upwards 
from 6.0 per cent to 6.9 per cent.   
 
ï The downside risks to growth in the near-term could be seen in terms of the 
adverse impact of the deficient monsoon on kharif crop in the GDP of next 
quarter, weakness in services activities that are dependent on external 
demand, notwithstanding the signs of improvements in recent months; and 
possible pressures on interest rates that may emerge from revival in demand 
for credit from the private sector as well as inflation expectations. Risks to 
global growth and higher oil prices also need to be given due consideration. 
 
ï The outlook for inflation will be conditioned by the upside risks in terms of 
persistence of supply side pressures in the near term, possible return of 
pricing power with stronger recovery in growth, further revival in private 
demand with improving consumer and business confidence, possible spurt in 
global commodity prices in response to recovery in the EMEs and advanced 
economies, and the possibility of high CPI and food price inflation spilling over 
to cause a generalised inflation.  
 
ï The possible sources of comfort that could ease some of the pressures on 
inflation include arrival of certain new crops in the market ñ particularly 
vegetables, additional release from the high level of buffer stocks of 
foodgrains, and negative output-gap persisting for some more time, which in 
turn may help in containing the demand side pressures. 
 
ï The growth and inflation mix for India is increasingly becoming asymmetric 
vis-‡-vis the pattern in other G-20 countries. The possibility of surges in 
capital inflows and the associated domestic liquidity conditions may also affect 
inflationary expectations, besides the impact of the rebound in international 
commodity prices in response to global recovery.  
 
ï With a stronger recovery in India, the risk of food price inflation causing 
generalised inflation cannot be ignored. 
 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2009-2010/1045                           Chief General  Manager 
 