he´sme he´keÀeMeôer  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
Yeejler³e fj ?eJeõ yeQkeÀ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFì : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
meb®eej fJeYeeäe, keWÀêr³e keÀe³eeõue³e, Sme.yer.Sme.ceeäeõ, cegbyeFõ 400001 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
HeÀesôe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 HewÀkeÌme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
February 13, 2010 
 
National policies alone cannot prevent a crisis:  
RBI’s International Research Conference concludes 
 
Give the known challenges, every central bank has to move in the direction of 
taking right steps that it may feel as appropriate despite lack of consensus on 
many critical issues, without waiting for the global system to move. It would be 
wrong, however, as noted by Mr. Stephen Roach, to presume that “best global 
policies are the sum of the best national policies”. In a globalised world, 
national policies alone, despite being the most appropriate, cannot prevent a 
crisis unless some of the global challenges are addressed collectively at the 
global level. This was one prominent message that came out of the two-day 
conference, the Reserve Bank of India had organised.  
The Reserve Bank had organised the first international research conference 
on February 12 and 13, 2010 at Hotel Trident, Nariman Point, Mumbai. The 
theme of the conference was "Challenges to Central Banking in the Context of 
Financial Crisis". The conference was the flagship event of the Reserve 
Bank’s Platinum Jubilee celebrations. In the context of the numerous 
challenges for central banks that have come to the forefront in the aftermath of 
the global crisis, this conference was viewed at the planning stage itself as an 
opportunity to seek suggestions and opinions from some most prominent 
policy makers and economists in the world on feasible options to deal with 
these challenges. 
More than 50 international dignitaries, including seven Central Bank 
Governors, several Deputy Governors, academicians and eminent 
personalities from international financial organizations, such as, the IMF, the World Bank and the Bank for International Settlements participated in the 
conference. In addition around 50 domestic experts including chairmen of 
nationalised banks, private banks and other financial institutions as well as 
eminent personalities from academics, financial sector and media also 
participated. 
There were several other key messages from the conference.  These 
were:  
• There was no consensus on the role of monetary policy for directly 
doing anything about asset prices and no one view was expressed 
on whether financial stability could be an explicit mandate of 
monetary policy.  
• LOLR and regulation were, however, generally seen as potential 
instruments to safeguard financial stability, though not enough.  
• There was no clear direction to resolve the impossible trinity, 
implying that countries have to adopt their own approach.  
• The need for macro-prudential regulation as an important, if not 
sufficient, next step was recognised. How financial innovations, 
with appropriate precautions, could contribute to high global 
growth, more particularly in emerging market and developing 
economies, was explained.  
• LOLR cannot solve insolvency problems was another key 
message.  
• The debate on what could be an appropriate Bagehot rule for the 
st
21 century will continue.  
• It was also viewed that different dimensions of central bank 
independence may come under threat if high debt levels of the 
governments persist over protracted periods of time.  
Summary of Sessionwise Deliberations 
The conference started with the welcome remarks by Mr. Deepak Mohanty, 
Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India. In the inaugural address that followed,   Dr. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India indicated why 
central banking could change in important ways after the crisis and how 
seeking solutions to the many challenges would be important for enhancing 
the contribution of central banks to the society at large in more effective ways 
and thereby regain greater credibility. 
Setting the tone for the conference proceedings, reflecting in essence the 
expectations from the deliberations to follow, the Reserve Bank Governor 
outlined five key challenges of significance to all central banks in the current 
context:  
*  managing national monetary policy decisions in a globalising 
environment, given the growing complexity in the interactions between 
external developments and domestic variables,  
*   redefining the mandate of central banks, given the pre-crisis attraction of 
inflation targeting and the post-crisis debate on  the role of  central banks in 
relation  to asset prices,  
* the responsibility of central banks towards financial stability, particularly 
beyond the conventional Lender of the Last Resort (LOLR) function, and 
* managing the costs and benefits of regulation, in view of the difficulty in 
drawing a fine balance between  regulation and financial innovations, and  
* the autonomy and accountability of central banks, particularly in the 
context of  fiscal exit plans of countries as well as  possible  alteration to the  
mandates of central banks.  
The issues emphasised by the Governor in his opening remarks conveyed the 
message that in a globalising world, central banks need solutions to common 
challenges, even though the nature and magnitude of the challenge could vary 
across countries.  Noble Laureate Andrew Michael Spence in his enlightening keynote address 
questioned the Washington Consensus, the often highlighted formula for 
success, which presumed limited role for the Government. He highlighted the 
role of public investment in emerging market economies, both for human 
capital formation and addressing the infrastructure constraint to growth, 
besides promoting inclusive growth. The broad macroeconomic challenges for 
such economies, he stressed, include good governance, management of 
exchange rate, sequencing of capital account, real sector reforms – balancing 
job creation versus job destruction and the fiscal situation. He outlined four 
clear roles for central banks which are more or less established. These are 
managing inflation, managing shocks - both external and internal, managing 
volatility – with skill and judgement and achieving a level of autonomy while 
acquiring credibility.  
He supported further extension of the role to cover financial stability, 
particularly given the challenges from asset prices, leverage and regulatory 
gaps. He suggested the extension of the role because, he felt that that: (a) 
Central banks have the comparative advantage on macro-prudential issues; 
(b) They have the information advantage; and (c) there is a general 
concentration of analytical talent in central banks.  He wondered that whether 
national governments will delegate that much of extra power to central banks 
remains a fundamental question. 
The first technical session started with the paper by Wiliam Poole questioning 
the role of discretion in the conduct of policies. His aversion to policy 
discretion was evident from his concluding remarks that “…we should not be 
dependent on the expertise of policy makers and the timeliness of 
congressional action to stabilise the economy”. 
The next paper by Benjamin Friedman highlighted that neither, self-regulation 
and vigilance by creditors, represent effective substitutes for regulation, which 
has to be the “responsibility of public policy to provide”. Regulatory systems, 
however, should differentiate inherently “risk taking trading” from “banking”, 
and differentiating “hedged positions” from “naked positions” should not be difficult for regulators.   He underscored the point that in a financial crisis, the 
distinction between illiquidity and insolvency generally disappears, creating 
testing conditions for real life use of the Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) function 
by a central bank. He recommended that central banks should distinguish 
between “losses that are reflections of genuine losses to the economy and 
losses that represent merely one side or the other of a zero-sum bet” and 
deny  access to the LOLR facility to such institutions that fail because of taking 
zero-sum bets.  
The paper by Lars Svensson stressed the relevance of “flexible inflation 
targetting” even after the global crisis, which is particularly important in the 
context of the apprehensions expressed in some quarters about inflation 
focussed monetary policy involving  possible neglect of asset price bubbles 
and financial stability objective. Svensson elaborated as to why “asset prices” 
and “financial stability” should not be explicit objectives of monetary policy, but 
how both are important from the standpoint of the constraints they could pose 
for the monetary policy transmission process. He did not find merit in the 
argument that flawed monetary policy stance before the crisis contributed to 
the crisis, since use of interest rates for attaining financial stability objective 
would have made little or no difference to stop the credit and housing bubble, 
but in that process might have caused considerable collateral damage to the 
real economy. The best instruments to achieve financial stability, he felt, are 
supervision and regulation, including appropriate bank resolution 
mechanisms.  
The second session that aimed at unraveling the challenges posed by 
increasing globalisation to central banks, started with the paper by Irma 
Rosenberg on a topic of immense direct policy relevance to most emerging 
market economies, i.e, the impossible trinity. Rosenberg explained the 
unpleasant trade-off associated with ‘impossible trinity’ and noted that “…the 
choice of monetary policy and exchange rate regime is neither simple nor 
clear cut”. She viewed that many emerging market economies in practice have 
intermediate solutions. She also highlighted that  more favourable growth prospects in emerging Asia, the possibility of interest rate in advanced 
countries remaining low for extended period and the associated carry trade 
possibilities could trigger   another wave of surge in capital flows to the Asian 
emerging economies, which has  to be managed. How these countries 
approach to resolve the trade-off, she stressed, could have consequences for 
the world economy. She concluded with the observation that “…since almost 
all advanced countries have chosen a monetary union or a float, there are 
good reasons for believing that other countries, when their capital flows are 
free and their financial infrastructure is complex and rich, will do the same.”  
The cost of delayed fiscal exit has been a general concern world over, and in 
this context, the paper by Stephen Cecchetti, M.S. Mohanty and Fabrizio 
Zampolli cautioned that the fiscal problems of industrial economies could be 
much larger than the official debt figures seem to suggest now. This could be 
on account of two factors, namely (a) pressure on revenues associated with 
possible permanent loss of potential output, and (b) rapidly aging population 
and the large and growing unfunded related liabilities.  They emphasised that 
fiscal problems of industrial countries need to be tackled relatively soon and 
resolutely, which could otherwise complicate the task of central banks in 
controlling inflation in future and might ultimately even threaten the credibility 
of monetary policy arrangements. They explained two channels through which 
unstable debt dynamics could lead to higher inflation: (1) direct monetisation 
of debt and (2) the temptation to reduce the real value of government debt 
through higher inflation. The current institutional setting of monetary policy in 
the advanced economies, however, may ensure that both risks remain 
contained, at least for now. The market assessment of sovereign risk, though, 
seems to be changing, unlike the pre-crisis perception that sovereign papers 
carry no risk.  
Since the global crisis has generally been viewed as the result of weaknesses 
in the regulatory and supervisory systems, the focus of the next session was 
to deliberate on options and challenges to fix them. The paper by Stephen 
Roach highlighted the need for both a new approach to regulatory oversight that incorporates “macro-prudential regulations” and a major reworking of the 
mandate of monetary policy to include financial stability.  He rejected the idea 
that post crisis search for remedy should include only regulatory measures. 
The past approach of monetary policy to asset prices would not change, 
unless financial stability is mandated as an explicit objective. The pre-crisis 
mainstream view on the role of monetary policy with regard to asset prices 
has been so overwhelming that, as stressed by him, “..central banks cannot 
be relied upon to break bad habits on their own”. Temptation of ideological 
debates and discretionary policy response could be avoided by a more rule-
based approach with financial stability mandate. One important message of 
this paper was that regulatory action is important, but that is no substitute for 
monetary policy. “…regulatory action can send an important message to 
market participants.  But the policy rate is a far more powerful enforcement 
mechanism,” Mr. Roach stated and added that a financial stability mandate 
could also help in adding clarity and direction to the “current ad hoc approach 
to evaluating hows and whens of the exit strategy”. 
Financial innovations clearly contributed to the crisis and the excesses in an 
inter-connected financial system generally went unnoticed. The risk of 
excessive regulatory response to the crisis stifling innovations has been a 
general concern. The paper by John Lipsky provided valuable insights and 
direction on the current debate on the subject. He cautioned that “without a 
renewed effort to foster financial innovation in the global economy, all 
countries – including emerging market economies – will underperform their 
potential”. Innovations, according to Mr. Lipsky, could perform three important 
tasks: first, open up new markets, such as markets for long-term financing and 
efficient risk sharing; second, deepen liquidity in existing markets; and third, 
raise the quantity and quality of investment. Instead of recommending a one-
size-fits all approach to financial innovations, he noted that each country 
should “find its own approach to fostering appropriate and useful financial 
innovations”. He concluded by emphasizing that “…financial innovations will continue to play an important role in raising growth globally, but especially in 
emerging markets and developing countries”.  
One technical session was devoted to examining whether financial stability 
should be an explicit objective of monetary policy and whether the absence of 
such a mandate contributed to the crisis.  Central banks have an implicit role 
relating to financial stability because of the Lender of the Last Resort (LOLR) 
Function.  John Williams, in his paper titled two cheers for Bagehot, explained 
st
how the Bagehot of 21 century looked like in the US when the Fed 
responded to the sub-prime crisis with its liquidity injection methods. There 
are, however, limits to the Bagehot prescription, i.e., LOLR cannot address the 
insolvency problem. Williamson emphasised that  “…issues of insolvency 
cannot be solved by central bank liquidity policies. These are properly the 
domain of the fiscal authority”. He also viewed that “…institutions with 
inadequate liquidity and risk management emphasize from the actions of the 
Fed and the Government, undermining the effectiveness of market discipline”. 
Another dimension of central banking activities which gained prominence after 
the crisis is the size and composition of the balance sheets of central banks.  
The paper by Krishna Srinivasan outlined the key policy actions central banks 
had to adopt “nimbly, decisively and creatively” to alleviate the financial crisis, 
and examined their effectiveness.  The scale and nature of unconventional 
measures differed across major central banks due to differences in 
institutional arrangements, the relative importance of banks in credit 
allocation, the degree of distress in the financial markets, and the depth and 
timing of recession or slowdown. In designing the exit strategy, he stressed 
that three aspects may have to be given particular attention; first, careful and 
consistent communication, second, unwinding should not  compromise central 
bank independence, and third, international spillovers of differentiated exit 
should not be ignored. Large and protracted increase in Government debt in 
many countries may tempt the governments to put pressure on central banks 
to maintain the accommodative stance. In this context he stressed that “to 
avoid return to damaging high inflation and preserve policy credibility, all the key dimensions of central bank independence – institutional, operational and 
financial – need to be respected and reinforced where necessary”.   
The technical discussions deliberated extensively on the key challenges for 
central banks and options to deal with them. After these sessions, views of the 
central bank governors, who face the real challenge on a day-to-day basis and 
deliver without the benefit of hindsight, were elicited. In the two panel 
discussions with Mr. Martin Wolf as the moderator, Governors of eight central 
banks offered their candid views on ten important issues, with the flavour of 
country-specific positions interspersed with their own global perspectives. The 
theme for the first panel – domestic monetary policy – covered five important 
issues, namely (a) the implications of the crisis for inflation emphasize; (b) the 
role of asset prices in monetary policy formulation; (c) the role of central banks 
in managing crises; (d) the role of central banks in regulation; and (v) exit from 
the crisis measures.  
Governor Christian Noyer of Bank of France advocated that financial 
stability should be the second pillar of strategy. Financial imbalances are 
better addressed by macro-prudential policy and there is a need to better 
understand the interactions between monetary and macro-prudential policy. 
Governor Glenn Robert Stevens of Reserve Bank of Australia put 
forward the argument that notwithstanding the questions raised about the 
utility of inflation targeting in the current crisis, it would be wrong to abandon it 
completely. Instead, it would be useful to develop a more realistic model 
explaining the interactions between the financial sector and monetary policy.     
Governor Tarisa Watanagase of Bank of Thailand outlined the need for 
emphasiz more on supervision rather than regulation. Financial stability 
should be part of central bank’s mandate so as to maintain sustainable growth 
and prevent boom-bust cycles. He said that more corrective efforts are 
required in areas such as risk awareness, risk management, moral hazards 
associated with policy response to crisis and the right kind of policies for 
creating right incentives. Dr. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, was emphatic that a 
lesson from this crisis is that pure inflation targeting does not work, because 
hough necessary, is no guarantee against financial stability.  
price stability, t
He also explained why India has not adopted explicit inflation emphasize, 
even though price stability is clearly one of the overriding objectives of the 
Reserve Bank. 
The theme for the second panel discussion – International Monetary 
System – covered five key issues, namely (a) Exchange rate policies and 
reserves accumulation; (b)  Management of capital flows; (c)  Future of the 
global reserve system; (d)  Reform of the International Monetary Fund; and (e) 
The potential for developing regional monetary arrangements.   
Governor Mark J Carney of Bank of Canada emphasized that the 
important issue right now is that of adjustment mechanism between surplus 
and deficit countries rather than a single currency dominance or the issue of 
reserve currency. 
Governor Miguel Fernandez Ordonez of Banco de Espana stated that 
“We must emphasize the significance of unprecedented coordinated action led 
by G20 in avoiding another great depression and in view of the expected 
difficult years ahead, we must sustain the global approach despite domestic 
differences in  policies.”  
Governor Atiur Rahman of Bangladesh Bank underscored the point that 
the international system should reorient itself to take into account the 
concerns of low income countries. In this regard, he emphasized the role of 
discussions of India with other Asian countries in forums like ACU, SAARC 
FINANCE etc. 
Managing Director Daw Tenzin of Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan 
emphasized the importance of reserves in case of small economies like 
Bhutan. He viewed that crisis gives an opportunity to redefine market 
discipline and consumption patterns. He noted that IMF should focus on the 
issues relevant to emerging market economies.  Dr. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India was categorical in his 
remarks that the International Monetary System was inadequate to prevent a 
major structural problem, that is, global imbalances, which had to manifest in 
the form of some crisis or the other at some stage. He noted that even though 
India did not contribute to global imbalances, it has to face the consequences.   
 
Alpana Killawala 
Press Release: 2009-2010/1125 Chief General Manager 
 