he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
April 20, 2010 
Annual Policy Statement for the Year 2010-11: Press  
Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor  
"This morning, I had a meeting with the chiefs of major banks where we 
announced the Reserve Bankís monetary policy for 2010-11. We had consulted with a 
wide array of stakeholders in the run up to this policy and took their views on board. Let 
me briefly summarise the main points of our discussion with the banks before I spell out 
the Reserve Banksí policy stance. 
Meeting with Banks 
Banks welcomed the Reserve Bankís policy stance. They agreed that the 
monetary measures announced by the Reserve Bank today were appropriate given the 
growth-inflation dynamics. Apart from monetary policy, discussions centred around 
three specific issues: (i) government market borrowing programme; (ii) financial 
inclusion; and (iii) infrastructure financing. Banks indicated that the programmed 
government borrowings may not crowd out private sector demand given the projected 
level of resources in the system. Banks assured the Reserve Bank that they share their 
commitment to financial inclusion and indicated that they will work innovatively to 
promote financial inclusion. Banks were concerned about their growing exposure to the 
infrastructure sector. Although they welcomed the measures initiated by the Reserve 
Bank to promote infrastructure financing by banks, they indicated that there is a need to 
develop alternative sources for financing to supplement the efforts of the banking 
sector.  
Global Context 
This monetary policy for 2010-11 is set against a rather complex economic 
backdrop.  Although the situation is more reassuring than it was a quarter ago, 
uncertainty about the shape and pace of global recovery persists. Private spending in 
advanced economies continues to be constrained and inflation remains generally 
subdued making it likely that fiscal and monetary stimuli in these economies will 
continue for an extended period. Emerging market economies (EMEs) are significantly 
ahead on the recovery curve, but some of them are also facing inflationary pressures. 
This has prompted central banks in some EMEs to begin phasing out their 
accommodative monetary policies.  
Indian Economy
Growth
In India, economic recovery, which began around the second quarter of 2009-10, 
has since shown sustained improvement. Industrial recovery has become more broad-
based and is expected to take firmer hold on the back of rising domestic and external 
demand. After a continuous decline for nearly a year, exports and imports have  2
expanded since October/November 2009.  Flow of resources to the commercial sector 
from both bank and non-bank sources has picked up. Surveys by the RBI as well as 
others suggest that business optimism has improved. On balance, under the 
assumption of a normal monsoon and sustained good performance of the industry and 
services sectors, for policy purposes, the Reserve Bank projects real GDP growth for 
2010-11 at 8.0 per cent with an upside bias. 
Inflation
The developments on the inflation front are, however, worrisome. Headline 
wholesale price index (WPI) inflation accelerated from 1.5 per cent in October 2009 to 
9.9 per cent by March 2010. There has been a significant change in the drivers of 
inflation in recent months. What was initially a process driven by food prices has now 
become more generalised. This is reflected in non-food manufactured products inflation 
rising from (-) 0.4 per cent in November 2009 to 4.7 per cent in March 2010. 
Going forward, three major uncertainties cloud the outlook for inflation. First, the 
prospects of the monsoon in 2010-11 are not yet clear. Second, crude prices continue 
to be volatile. Third, there is evidence of demand side pressures building up. On 
balance, keeping in view domestic demand-supply balance and the global trend in 
commodity prices, the baseline projection for WPI inflation for March 2011 is placed at 
5.5 per cent.  
Monetary Aggregates 
Keeping in view the need to balance the resource demand to meet credit offtake 
by the private sector and government borrowings, monetary projections have been 
made consistent with the growth and inflation outlook. For policy purposes, money 
supply (M ) growth for 2010-11 is placed at 17.0 per cent. Consistent with this, 
3
aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) are projected to grow by 
18.0 per cent. The growth in non-food credit of SCBs is placed at 20.0 per cent. As 
always, these numbers are provided as indicative projections and not as targets. 
Financial Markets 
The overall liquidity remained in surplus though it declined towards the end of 
the year consistent with the monetary policy stance. Overnight interest rates generally 
stayed close to the lower bound of the LAF rate corridor.  The large market borrowing 
by the Government put upward pressure on the yields on government securities which 
was contained by active liquidity management by the Reserve Bank.  
Market Borrowings 
The Union Budget for 2010-11 has begun the process of fiscal consolidation and 
the net market borrowing requirement of the Central Government in 2010-11 is 
budgeted lower than that in the previous year. However, fresh issuance of securities in 
2010-11 will be 36 per cent higher than last year. Managing the borrowing is going to 
be more challenging than in last year for three main reasons. 
First, the option for liquidity management through OMO and MSS which we used 
extensively last year will be limited this year.  
Second, private credit demand will pick up, making crowding out a potential 
possibility. 
Finally, inflation pressures are stronger.   
Regardless, the Reserve Bank will ensure that credit requirement of both the 
government and the private sector are met.  3
 
Risk Factors 
Let me turn to risk factors. While the indicative projections of growth and inflation 
for 2010-11 may appear reassuring, we need to recognise the major downside risks to 
growth and upside risks to inflation:  
ï The prospects of sustaining the global recovery hinge strongly on the revival of 
private demand which continues to be weak in major advanced economies. 
While recovery in India is expected to be driven predominantly by domestic 
demand, a sluggish and uncertain global environment can have an adverse 
impact. 
ï If the global recovery gains momentum, commodity and energy prices may 
harden further which could add to inflationary pressures.  
ï Any unfavourable monsoon rainfall pattern could exacerbate food inflation, and 
could also impose a fiscal burden and dampen rural consumer and investment 
demand.  
ï The continued accomodative monetary policy in advanced economies is 
expected to trigger large capital flows into the EMEs, including India. This will 
pose a challenge for exchange rate and monetary management.  
A few comments on the exchange rate management. Our exchange rate policy 
is not guided by a fixed or pre-announced target or band. Our policy has been to retain 
the flexibility to intervene in the market to manage excessive volatility and disruptions to 
the macroeconomic situation. Recent experience has underscored the issue of large 
and often volatile capital flows influencing exchange rate movements against the grain 
of economic fundamentals and current account balances. There is, therefore, need to 
be vigilant against the build-up of sharp and volatile exchange rate movements and its 
potentially harmful impact on the real economy. 
Monetary Policy Stance
The monetary policy response in India since October 2009 has been calibrated 
to Indiaís specific macroeconomic conditions. In the wake of the global economic crisis, 
the Reserve Bank pursued an accommodative monetary policy beginning mid-
September 2008. This policy instilled confidence in market participants, mitigated the 
adverse impact of the global financial crisis on the economy and ensured that the 
economy started recovering ahead of most other economies.  However, in view of the 
rising food inflation and the risk of it impinging on inflationary expectations, the Reserve 
Bank began the process of exit from the expansionary monetary policy beginning 
October 2009.
Our monetary policy stance for 2010-11 has been guided by the following three 
considerations. First, despite the increase of 25 basis points each in the repo rate and 
the reverse repo rate in mid-March 2010, our real policy rates are still negative.  With 
the recovery now firmly in place, we need to move in a calibrated manner in the 
direction of normalising our policy instruments. Second, the current episode of inflation, 
which was triggered by supply side factors, is developing into a wider inflationary 
process. Demand side pressures are now clearly discernible. There is, therefore, need 
to ensure that demand side inflation does not become entrenched. The third 
consideration that informed our monetary policy stance is the need to balance the 
monetary policy imperative of absorbing liquidity and ensuring that credit is available to 
both the Government and the private sector.   4
 
Against this background, the stance of monetary policy is intended to: 
ï Anchor inflation expectations, while being prepared to respond appropriately, 
swiftly and effectively to further build-up of inflationary pressures.  
ï Actively manage liquidity to ensure that the growth in demand for credit by both 
the private and public sectors is satisfied in a non-disruptive way.  
ï Maintain an interest rate regime consistent with price, output and financial 
stability.  
Monetary Policy Measures
Our Monetary Policy Statement 2010-11 specifies the following monetary 
measures:  
i) The repo rate has been raised by 25 basis points from 5.0 per cent to 5.25 per 
cent with immediate effect. 
ii) The reverse repo rate has been raised by 25 basis points from 3.5 per cent to 
3.75 per cent with immediate effect. 
iii) The cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks has been raised by 25 basis 
points from 5.75 per cent to 6.0 per cent of their net demand and time 
liabilities (NDTL) effective the fortnight beginning April 24, 2010. 
Expected Outcome
We expect four major outcomes from the above policy action:  
i) Inflation will be contained and inflationary expectations will be anchored. 
ii) The recovery process will be sustained.  
iii) Government borrowing requirements and the private credit demand will be 
met.  
iv) Policy instruments will be further aligned in a manner consistent with the 
evolving state of the economy. 
Way Forward
The Reserve Bank will continue to monitor macroeconomic conditions, 
particularly the price situation, closely and take further action as warranted. 
Developmental and Regulatory Policies 
Let me now turn to development and regulatory issues. Over the last several 
years, the Reserve Bank has undertaken wide ranging financial sector reforms to 
improve financial intermediation and maintain financial stability. This process has now 
become more intensive with a focus on drawing appropriate lessons from the global 
financial crisis and putting in place a regulatory regime that is alert to possible build-up 
of financial imbalances. The Reserve Bank will further its efforts to improve the 
efficiency of the financial sector and financial markets while maintaining financial 
stability. Simultaneously, the Reserve Bank will vigorously pursue the financial inclusion 
agenda. 
I will highlight a few actions we have taken or plan to take in these areas:  5
Financial Stability 
ï Publishing the Financial Stability Report on a half-yearly basis. The first report 
released on March 25, 2010 found that the overall risk to financial stability was 
limited. 
Interest Rates 
ï Mandating banks to switch over to the system of Base Rate from July 1, 2010 to 
facilitate better pricing of loans, enhance transparency in lending rates and 
improve the assessment of monetary policy transmission.  
Financial Market Products 
ï Introducing Interest Rate Futures on 5-year and 2-year notional coupon bearing 
securities and 91-day Treasury Bills. 
ï Permitting the recognised stock exchanges to introduce plain vanilla currency 
options on spot US Dollar/Rupee exchange rate for residents. 
ï Introducing a reporting platform for secondary market transactions in CDs and 
CPs. 
ï Setting up a Working Group to work out the modalities for an efficient, single-
point reporting mechanism for all OTC interest rate and forex derivative 
transactions. 
Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion 
ï Permitting banks to engage any individual as banking correspondents (BCs) 
subject to banksí comfort level and their carrying out suitable due diligence. 
ï Discussing with individual banks their Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) and 
monitoring their implementation.   
ï Mandating banks not to insist on collateral securities in case of loans up to Rs.10 
lakhs as against the present limit of Rs.5 lakhs extended to all units in the MSEs 
sector. 
ï Urging banks to keep in view the recommendations made by the High Level 
Task Force constituted by the Government of India for increasing the flow of 
credit to the MSE sector, particularly to micro enterprises. The Reserve Bank will 
monitor the performance of banks in this regard. 
ï Constituting a Committee to gather information on the working of grassroot level 
rural co-operatives for assessing their potential to contribute to financial 
inclusion. 
ï Setting up a Committee for studying the advisability of granting new urban co-
operative banking licences. 
ï Allowing well-managed UCBs to set up off-site ATMs without seeking approval 
through the annual business plans. 
Regulatory Measures 
ï Preparation of a discussion paper on the mode of presence of foreign banks 
through branch or wholly owned subsidiary by September 2010. 
ï Putting out a discussion paper marshalling the international practices, Indian 
experience and also the extant ownership and governance guidelines for 
considering additional banking licences to private sector players by end-July 
2010.  6
ï Constituting a Working Group to recommend a roadmap for the introduction of a 
holding company structure. 
ï Treating annuities under build-operate-transfer (BOT) model in respect of 
road/highway projects and toll collection rights in some situations as tangible 
securities subject to certain conditions. 
ï Allowing securitisation companies/reconstruction companies (SCs/RCs) to 
acquire the assets either in their own books or directly in the books of the trusts 
set up by them. 
ï Issuing comprehensive guidelines based on Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
principles on sound compensation practices by end-June 2010.  
ï Entering into bilateral MoU with overseas supervisory authorities within the 
existing legal provisions, consistent with the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision (BCBS) principles. 
ï Treating Core Investment Companies (CICs) having an asset size of Rs.100 
crore and above as systemically important core investment companies. Such 
companies be required to register with the Reserve Bank. 
Customer Service 
ï Setting up a Committee to look into banking services rendered to retail and small 
customers. 
ï Further strengthening the mechanism for implementing the Reserve Bankís 
guidelines on customer service, through on-site and off-site inspections.  
ï Requiring banks to devote exclusive time in a Board meeting once every six 
months to review and deliberate on customer service." 
 
 
G. Raghuraj 
Press Release : 2009-2010/1417                 Deputy General Manager 
 
 
 
 