 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
  
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
July 27, 2010 
First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2010-11:  
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
  "This morning, the Reserve Bank released the First Quarter Review of 
Monetary Policy for 2010-11 at a meeting of the chief executives of major banks. The 
important decisions contained in the review were to raise the repo rate from 5.5 per 
cent to 5.75 per cent and the reverse repo rate from 4 per cent to 4.50 per cent.  This 
asymmetric raise in rates narrows the LAF corridor from 150 basis points to 125 
basis points.    
Balance of Policy Stance 
2. The dominant concern that has shaped the monetary policy stance in this 
review is high inflation. Even as food price inflation and, more generally, consumer 
price inflation, have shown some moderation, they are still in double digits. Non-food 
inflation has risen, and demand side pressures are clearly evident. With growth 
taking firm hold, the balance of policy stance has to shift decisively to containing 
inflation and anchoring inflationary expectations.  
Global Outlook 
3. Since our last policy review in April, the macroeconomic environment has 
changed significantly. In the aftermath of the Greek sovereign debt crisis and other 
visible soft spots in Europe and the US, there is renewed uncertainty about the 
sustainability of the recovery. In contrast, EMEs are witnessing strong growth, driven 
by rising domestic demand, restocking of inventories and, thus far, recovering global 
trade. The relatively rapid recovery in EMEs has also been accompanied by higher 
inflation. Overall, though, there is widespread expectation of a slowdown of the 
global economy in the second half of 2010. 
Indian Economy
Growth
4. The macroeconomic developments in India are contrarian to the global trend. 
We have recovered faster, but our inflation rate has also been higher. The recovery 
process has consolidated and become more broad-based since April 2010. A big 
ëknown unknowní in April 2010 was the outlook on monsoon. That has since become 
a ëknown knowní in the sense that rainfall so far has been better than during last 
year, and the crop-wise area sown and the distribution of rainfall offer scope for 
cautious optimism on the agricultural front.  2
5. Better farm sector prospects should lead to a pick-up in rural demand. This 
should give further momentum to the performance of the industrial sector which has 
been growing firmly. The strength of the recovery is also reflected in the sales and 
profitability growth of the corporate sector with more investment intentions being 
translated into action across a range of sectors. While domestic drivers of growth are 
robust, any slowdown in the global recovery will affect all EMEs, including India.   
6. Taking into account the above factors, the projection for real GDP growth for 
2010-11 is revised to 8.5 per cent, up from our April policy projection of 8.0 per cent 
with an upside bias. This upward revision is primarily based on better industrial 
production and its favourable impact on the services sector while giving due 
consideration to the global scenario. 
Inflation
7. The developments on the inflation front are, however, worrisome. Let me 
explain. WPI inflation has been in double digits since February 2010. Primary food 
articles inflation, despite some moderation, continues to be in double digits. Between 
November 2009 and June 2010, non-food inflation rose from zero to 10.6 per cent 
and non-food manufactured inflation from zero to 7.3 per cent. Significantly, non-food 
items contributed over 70 per cent to WPI inflation in June 2010, suggesting that 
inflation is now very much generalised. Inflation in terms of all four consumer price 
indices remains in double digits notwithstanding some decline in recent months. 
8. Going forward, the outlook on inflation will be shaped by: (i) the monsoon 
performance for the remaining period; (ii) movements in global energy and 
commodity prices, which have been showing distinct signs of softening over the past 
few weeks; and (iii) potential build-up in demand-side pressures with the 
strengthening of domestic growth drivers.  
9. Taking into account the emerging domestic and external scenario, the 
baseline projection for WPI inflation for March 2011 has been raised to 6.0 per cent 
from our April policy projection of 5.5 per cent.  
Monetary Aggregates
10. It is expected that even with the higher growth projection, monetary 
aggregates will evolve along the projected trajectory indicated in the April policy 
statement. Accordingly, for policy purposes, we have retained the earlier projections 
of money supply (M ) at 17 per cent and of non-food bank credit growth at 20 per 
3
cent.  
Risk Factors 
11. Let me indicate some important risks to the growth and inflation outlook. 
ï The first risk factor is that if the global recovery falters, the performance of 
EMEs is likely to be adversely affected, and a widespread slowdown in global 
trade will have an impact on the Indian manufacturing and service sectors too. 
ï The second risk factor is that an uncertain global situation will  significantly 
reduce the flow of capital into EMEs. Such a slowdown in capital inflows will 
constrain domestic investment which is critical to achieving and sustaining 
high growth rates. This could potentially be a problem in India too since our 
rapid recovery has resulted in a widening of the current account deficit.  3
ï It must be recognised though that the risk of capital flows runs both ways. It is 
quite possible that EMEs, including India, will receive more flows than they 
need because of accommodative monetary policies of advanced country 
central banks for an extended period. Large capital inflows above the 
absorptive capacity of our economy will pose a challenge for monetary and 
exchange rate management, and also have implications for asset prices. In 
this scenario, a widening current account deficit will help absorb a larger 
proportion of the inflows. 
ï The third risk factor is on the inflation front.  Softening of inflation in the 
months ahead is contingent on moderation of food prices which in turn will 
depend on a balanced spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall in the 
remaining period of this monsoon season. 
ï While on risk factors, we must note one important upside.  If global growth 
does not pick up, commodity and energy prices will remain subdued.  
Furthermore, unutilised global capacity in several sectors will soften the prices 
of imports and put downward pressure on import substitutes.  
Monetary Policy Stance
12. The Reserve Bank began the reversal of its expansionary monetary policy in 
October 2009 and has calibrated the exit to Indiaís specific growth-inflation 
dynamics. Todayís policy action in particular has been informed by three major 
considerations: 
  
 (i)  domestic economic recovery is firmly in place and is strengthening; 
  
(ii)  there is a need to contain the demand-side inflationary pressures which 
are clearly evident; and  
(iii)  despite the increase in the policy rates by 75 basis points cumulatively, 
it is imperative that we continue in the direction of normalising our 
policy instruments to a level consistent with the evolving growth and 
inflation scenario, while taking care not to disrupt the recovery. 
13. Our monetary policy actions are expected to:  
i) Moderate inflation by reining in demand pressures and inflationary 
expectations.  
 
ii) Maintain financial conditions conducive to sustaining growth. 
 
iii) Generate liquidity conditions consistent with more effective transmission of 
policy actions. 
 
iv) Restrict the volatility of short-term rates to a narrower corridor. 
Operating Procedures of Monetary Policy  
14. Now let me turn to two new initiatives ñ one structural and the other on policy 
review and communication.  
15. The Reserve Bankís LAF operates in such a manner that as systemic liquidity 
alternates between surplus and deficit, even at the margin, the overnight call money 
rate alternates between the reverse repo rate and the repo rate. As the systemic  4
liquidity transits from a uni-directional surplus mode to a bi-directional mode, it will 
have implications for the effectiveness of monetary transmission. In the context of 
the changing liquidity dynamics, the operation of the LAF needs to be studied.  
Accordingly, it is proposed to set up a Working Group to review the current operating 
procedure of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank, including the LAF. 
Mid-Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 
 
16. The second new initiative relates to a more frequent policy review. While our 
scheduled policy announcements are quarterly, in recent years, there have been 
several occasions, including March and July 2010, when we had to take off-cycle 
monetary policy actions. One significant advantage of the quarterly schedule is that it 
allows us to bring the full range of inputs into the decision-making process. 
Nevertheless, in a rapidly evolving macroeconomic situation, we need to combine 
the rigour and comprehensiveness of the quarterly process with the responsiveness 
and flexibility of more frequent reviews. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank will now 
undertake mid-quarter reviews roughly at the interval of about one and half months 
after each quarterly review. As per schedule, mid-quarter reviews will be in June, 
September, December and March.  They will be by way of a press release and will 
communicate our assessment of economic conditions more frequently, and will 
provide a rationale for either policy action or maintenance of the status quo. 
However, the Reserve Bank will have the flexibility, as always, to take swift and pre-
emptive policy action, as and when warranted by the evolving macroeconomic 
developments. 
Discussions with Banks 
17. Banks welcomed the Reserve Bankís policy stance. They agreed that the 
monetary measures announced by the Reserve Bank today were appropriate in light 
of the current global and domestic balance.  They also indicated that credit growth 
has picked up, though it is yet to become broad-based. Apart from monetary 
measures, discussions with banks focused on four specific issues viz., (i) liquidity 
situation and the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) corridor; (ii) Basel III norms; (iii) 
credit flows to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs); and (iv) base rate. 
Banks indicated that the liquidity situation may remain tight for some more time as 
deposit growth has lagged behind the credit growth. They felt that a narrower LAF 
corridor will restrict short-term interest rate volatility and improve monetary 
transmission. Banks mentioned that the impact of Basel III norms on Indian banks 
will not be significant.  However, statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) assets need to be 
included in the liquidity coverage ratio. Credit portfolio in respect of MSMEs sector of 
many banks is growing at a rapid rate.  The Reserve Bank emphasised that the pace 
of credit expansion to MSMEs should be sustained and banks should sensitise the 
frontline managers the importance of lending to MSMEs. Banks indicated that the 
transition to the base rate has been generally smooth, though there are issues 
relating to the existing loans." 
 
G. Raghuraj 
Press Release : 2010-2011/140             Deputy General Manager 