 
? ? ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null??? ?? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null? ???? ??, ??. ??. ??. ???, ???-400001 
???? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai-400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 ? null? /Fax: 91 22 2266 0358 ?- ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
January 25, 2011 
Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2010-11 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
"This morning, the Reserve Bank released its Third Quarter Review of 
Monetary Policy for 2010-11. Based on an assessment of the current 
macroeconomic situation, we decided to: 
• increase the repo and reverse repo rates by 25 basis points (bps) each. 
Accordingly, the repo rate stands at 6.5 per cent and the reverse repo rate 
at 5.5 per cent; 
• retain the cash reserve ratio (CRR) at 6 per cent of net demand and time 
liabilities (NDTL) of banks. 
2. With the increases announced today, since mid-March 2010, the Reserve 
Bank has cumulatively increased the repo rate by 175 bps and the reverse repo rate 
by 225 bps. Additionally, the CRR was increased by 100 bps. Banks have responded 
to this calibrated tightening by raising their deposit and lending rates, suggesting 
strong monetary policy transmission. 
 
3. In addition to changes in the policy rates, we made some decisions to 
manage the current liquidity situation. We decided to extend the two special 
measures currently in operation, viz.:  
• the additional liquidity support to scheduled commercial banks under the 
liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) to the extent of up to one per cent of their 
NDTL; and 
• a daily second LAF up to April 8, 2011. 
Considerations Behind the Policy Move  
4. Let me now explain the considerations that guided our monetary policy stance 
for the remaining period of 2010-11:  
i) Inflation is clearly the dominant concern. Even as the rate itself remains 
unacceptably high, the reversal in the direction of inflation is striking. Primary 
food articles inflation has risen again sharply. Non-food articles inflation and 
fuel inflation are already at elevated levels. Non-food manufacturing inflation 
has remained sticky. There are signs of food and fuel price increases spilling 
over into generalised inflation. 
ii) Second, there has been a sharp rise in global commodity prices which has 
heightened upside risks to domestic inflation. 
?nullnull???nullnullnull?? 2
iii) Third, growth has moved close to its pre-crisis trajectory even in the face of an 
uncertain global recovery.  
iv) Fourth, the uncertainty with regard to global recovery has reduced.  
Global Outlook 
5. Let me now give you a brief overview of the global economy. Advanced 
economies are showing firmer signs of sustainable recovery. Although uncertainty 
continues in the Euro area, there is an overall improvement in global growth 
prospects. However, inflation has edged up in major advanced economies even as a 
large slack persists, owing mainly to increase in food and energy prices. Whereas 
signs of inflation in the advanced countries are only incipient, many emerging market 
economies have been facing strong inflationary pressures, reflecting higher 
international commodity prices and rising domestic demand pressures. Significantly, 
food, energy and commodity prices are widely expected to harden during 2011, 
driven by a combination of supply constraints and rising global demand, as the 
advanced economies consolidate their recovery. This suggests that inflation could be 
a global concern in 2011. 
The Indian Economy 
Growth  
6. Turning to the domestic macroeconomic situation, the 8.9 per cent GDP 
growth in the first half of 2010-11 suggests that the economy is operating close to its 
trend growth rate, powered mainly by domestic factors. The kharif harvest has been 
good and rabi prospects look promising. Good agricultural growth has boosted rural 
demand. Export performance in recent months has been encouraging.  
 
7. With the risks to growth in 2010-11 being mainly on the upside, the baseline 
projection of real GDP growth is retained at 8.5 per cent but with an upside bias. 
Inflation  
8. Moving on to the inflation situation, the moderation in headline inflation 
observed between August and November 2010 was along the projected trajectory of 
the Reserve Bank. This trend, however, reversed when WPI inflation (year-on-year) 
moved up from 7.4 per cent in November 2010 to 8.4 per cent in December 2010, 
due mainly to sharp increase in the prices of vegetables, mineral oils and minerals.  
 
9. While the current spike in food prices is expected to be transitory, inflation 
stemming from structural demand-supply mismatches in several non-cereal food 
items such as pulses, oilseeds, eggs, fish, meat and milk is likely to persist till supply 
response kicks in. Non-food manufacturing inflation also remains above its medium-
term trend of 4 per cent. 
 
10. Going forward, the inflation outlook will be shaped by three factors: (i) on how 
the food price situation, both domestic and global, evolves; (ii) how global commodity 
prices behave; and (iii) the extent to which demand side pressures may manifest.  
 
11. We have raised the baseline projection of WPI inflation for March 2011 from 
5.5 per cent to 7.0 per cent. This upward revision was based on several 
considerations. First, the upside risks to inflation, as mentioned in the mid quarter 
review of December 2010, have materialised as reflected in the increase in prices of 
metals and non-administered fuel. Second, there have been some transitory supply 
shocks which triggered a sharp increase in vegetable prices. Third, petroleum and  3
aviation turbine fuel prices went up in early January which will add 9 bps to WPI 
inflation. While the impact of transitory factors is expected to dissipate, price 
pressures on account of demand-supply imbalances in respect of some commodities 
will persist.  
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
12. While the year-on-year money supply (M ) growth at 16.5 per cent in 
3
December 2010 was close to the indicative projection of 17.0 per cent, non-food 
credit growth at 24.4 per cent was much above the indicative projection of 20.0 per 
cent. Credit expansion in the recent period has been rather sharp, far outpacing the 
expansion in deposits. Rapid credit growth without a commensurate increase in 
deposits is not sustainable.  
 
13. Tight liquidity conditions persisted throughout the third quarter of 2010-11. 
While the overall liquidity in the system has remained in deficit consistent with the 
policy stance, the extent of tightness is beyond the comfort zone of the Reserve 
Bank, i.e., (+)/(-) one per cent of NDTL of banks. Above-normal government cash 
balances contributed to the frictional component of liquidity deficit. However, the 
widening difference between credit and deposit growth rates coupled with high 
currency growth accentuated the structural liquidity deficit.  
 
14. The Reserve Bank instituted a number of measures to mitigate the liquidity 
deficit such as: (i) reduction in the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) of scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) by one percentage point; (ii) conducting open market 
operation (OMO) purchase of government securities of the order of over `67,000 
crore; (iii) additional liquidity support to SCBs under the LAF; and (iv) introduction of 
a second LAF window on a daily basis. 
 
15. While the Reserve Bank will endeavour to provide liquidity to meet the 
productive credit requirements of a growing economy, it is important that credit 
growth moderates to conform broadly to the indicative projection. This will prevent 
any further build-up of demand side pressures. Accordingly, the projection for 2010-
11 of M growth has been retained at 17 per cent and that for non-food credit growth 
3
at 20 per cent. The Reserve Bank will constantly monitor the credit growth and, if 
necessary, engage with banks which show an abnormal incremental credit-deposit 
ratio. 
External Sector 
16. A brief,  albeit important, comment about the external sector. In the first half of 
2010-11, the current account deficit (CAD) expanded to 3.7 per cent of GDP from 2.2 
per cent in the corresponding period of last year. Subsequent trade data indicate that 
exports have grown faster than imports which will improve the CAD. For the year as 
a whole, we estimate that the CAD will be close to 3.5 per cent of GDP.   
Risk Factors  
17. Now let me highlight the risks to our growth and inflation projections:  
• Food inflation has remained at an elevated level for about two years and 
the prospect of it spilling over to the general inflation process is rapidly 
becoming a reality.  
• Imports as a means to supplement domestic availability for many 
commodities will become less of an option as global growth consolidates  4
and capacity utilisation increases. This may accentuate demand side 
pressures. 
• The estimated current account deficit of 3.5 per cent of GDP for 2010-11 is 
not sustainable.  
• On top of the level of CAD which is a risk, the financing of CAD is an 
additional risk. Should global recovery be faster than expected, it may also 
have implication for the financing of CAD.  
• The recent improvement in the fiscal situation owes largely to one-off 
revenues generated from spectrum auctions and disinvestment proceeds. 
However, the commodity price developments pose significant risks for 
fiscal consolidation in the year ahead. The efficacy of further fiscal 
adjustment will be influenced by the firming trend in commodity prices and 
the extent to which Government will allow this to pass through to 
consumers. 
• The combined risks from inflation, CAD and fiscal situation contribute to an 
increase in uncertainty about economic stability that consumers and 
investors have to deal with. 
Monetary Policy Stance  
18. The current stance of monetary policy is intended to:  
• Contain the spill-over of high food and fuel inflation into generalised 
inflation and anchor inflationary expectations, while being prepared to 
respond to any further build-up of inflationary pressures. 
• Maintain an interest rate regime consistent with price, output and financial 
stability. 
• Manage liquidity to ensure that it remains broadly in balance, with neither 
a surplus diluting monetary transmission nor a deficit choking off fund 
flows. 
Expected Outcomes 
19. Today’s policy actions are expected to:  
• Contain the spill-over from rise in food and fuel prices to generalised 
inflation.  
• Rein in rising inflationary expectations, which may be aggravated by the 
structural and transitory nature of food price increases. 
• Be moderate enough not to disrupt growth. 
• Continue to provide comfort to banks in their liquidity management 
operations. 
Guidance 
20. Let me now give you some guidance. Current growth and inflation trends 
clearly warrant that we persist with the anti-inflationary monetary stance. Looking 
beyond 2010-11, the Reserve Bank expects the domestic growth momentum to 
stabilise. Inflation is expected to moderate from the first quarter of 2011-12, but 
several upside risks are already visible. The monetary stance will be determined by 
how these factors impact the overall inflationary scenario.    5
Discussions with Banks 
21. At today’s meeting with bank CEOs where the policy was released, banks 
welcomed the Reserve Bank’s policy stance. They shared the Reserve Bank’s 
concerns about inflation and agreed that the monetary measures and guidance 
about the stance announced by the Reserve Bank today were appropriate in the 
current domestic growth-inflation scenario. Apart from monetary measures, 
discussions with banks centred on: (i) inflation dynamics; (ii) credit growth and asset 
liability management; and (iii) liquidity management and market borrowing situation. 
Banks felt that there was a need to step up investment in agricultural infrastructure 
and focus on better supply chain management. In this context, Indian Banks’ 
Association (IBA) will prepare a Discussion Paper to examine what banks could do 
to improve finance to enhance productivity and diversification in the agriculture 
sector. While welcoming the extension of additional liquidity support facility and the 
second LAF up to April 8, 2011, banks felt that the liquidity situation was still tight 
and there was a need to inject primary liquidity by the Reserve Bank.  Banks 
indicated that they would endeavour to align the credit growth rate with that of the 
deposit growth rate.  With a view to addressing asset liability mismatches, banks felt 
that there was a need to look into innovative solutions for financing the infrastructure 
sector – a major source of asset liability mismatch. In particular, they suggested that 
there was a need to incentivise raising of long-term resources by banks through 
appropriate fiscal measures.  The recommendations of the Malegam Sub-Committee 
on the micro-finance sector were also discussed in the meeting."  
 
                 R.R. Sinha 
Press Release : 2010-2011/1065              Deputy General Manager 
 
 
 
 