 
? ?  ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null???   ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null?  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
? ???? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? null? /Fax: 91 22 22660358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
August 25, 2011 
RBI releases Annual Report for 2010-11 
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Annual Report for 2010-11. This is 
a statutory Report of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank that covers (i) the 
assessment of the macroeconomic performance during 2010-11 and the prospects for 
2011-12, and (ii) the working and operations of the Reserve Bank and its financial 
accounts. The highlights of the Report are as follows: 
Assessment for 2010-11 
The Indian economy returned to a high growth path. However, challenges 
emerged as investment activity slowed, fiscal consolidation was led by cyclical and one-
off factors, leaving its sustainability in question and inflation remained sticky on the 
back of new pressures.  
• In response, cumulative monetary tightening by raising operational policy rates 
by 475 bps since mid-March 2010 has been one of the sharpest around the 
world. The policy was tightened aggressively as high inflation would have 
brought down growth by itself. Trade off for higher inflation for lower 
unemployment or higher growth does not work if inflation is high. The threshold 
inflation at which this change occurs has been empirically estimated in 4-6 per 
cent range for India. The inflation objective of monetary policy is lower than the 
threshold keeping in view the welfare costs for the poor and the open nature of 
the economy. As such, the Reserve Bank’s medium-term inflation objective has 
been 3 per cent. Reserve Bank’s emphasis on containing perceptions of inflation 
in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent 
 
• Fiscal deficit ratios in 2010-11 turned out to be better than envisaged in the 
Union budget. A qualitative assessment of fiscal correction during 2010-11, 
however, raises concerns. Capital outlay-GDP ratio fell. Improved fiscal position 
had a large temporary component. Clearly, a more enduring fiscal consolidation 
strategy is needed. 
 
• The improvement in the current account gap came about by cyclical upswing in 
global trade and turnaround in invisibles. This was on back of a strong pick-up in 
exports from November 2010 aided by diversification of trade in composition and 
direction. Trade policy supported exports through schemes such as DEPB. 
 
• Financial markets across the world witnessed significant deleveraging in the 
post-crisis period. However, balance sheet risks still remain. In India, post-
Lehman crisis, regulators have taken several measures for risk mitigation, but 
areas of concerns remain.  
 
• A series of stress tests conducted by the Reserve Bank showed that banks 
remained reasonably resilient. However, risks of asset quality deterioration in 
?nullnull???nullnullnull?? 2
infrastructure sector needs to be averted by quickly resolving the pricing and 
input supply issues. The gross NPA ratio of scheduled commercial banks which 
increased marginally to 2.52 per cent by end-June 2011 still remains low. Based 
on unaudited results of these banks, the CRAR at 13.86 per cent as at end-June 
2011 was well above the minimum requirement. 
Prospects for 2011-12 
Going ahead, global uncertainty, sticky inflation, hardening interest rates and 
high base, especially for agriculture, could moderate growth in 2011-12. On the other 
hand, though global commodity prices appear to have plateaued, inflation is likely to be 
elevated in near term and fall only towards the later part of the year as monetary 
transmission works through further. 
Growth Outlook for 2011-12 
• After above trend growth during 2010-11, growth is expected to decelerate but 
remain close to the trend of about 8.0 per cent in 2011-12. If global financial 
problems amplify and slow down global growth markedly, it would impart a 
downward bias to the growth projection of around 8.0 per cent indicated in the 
Monetary Policy. 
 
• Growth prospects for the year 2011-12 seem to be relatively subdued compared 
with the previous year. Global uncertainties, high global oil and commodity 
prices, persistent inflationary pressures, rising input costs, rise in cost of capital 
due to monetary tightening and slow project execution are some of the factors 
that are weighing on growth.  
 
• Crop prospects remain good, though on a high base the growth is likely to turn 
out to be less than last year. The monsoon up to August 17, 2011 was 1 per cent 
below the Long Period Average. RBI’s overall foodgrains production weighted 
rainfall index was 101 till August 17, 2011 (88 in the corresponding period last 
year). Sowing up to August 12, 2011 was marginally higher than in 
corresponding period of the previous year.  
 
• Downside risks to the industrial growth in 2011-12 may arise from falling 
business confidence, but robustness of the services sector would continue to 
support the growth process. There is a very strong structural dimension to 
services sector growth in India.  
 
• Investment may remain soft in the near term, while private consumption may 
decelerate. In face of moderating demand, expenditure-switching from 
government consumption expenditures to public investments would help. 
Inflation Outlook for 2011-12 
• Inflation is likely to remain high and moderate only towards the latter part of the 
year to about 7 per cent by March 2012. The decline in global commodity prices 
has not been very significant. Should the global recovery weaken ahead, 
commodity prices may decline further, which should have a salutary impact on 
domestic inflation. 
 
• The Fed has indicated that it will pursue its near zero rate policy at least till mid-
2013. It has also hinted at another dose of quantitative easing. This policy stance 
may keep the commodity prices elevated. The pass-through of the rise in global 
commodity prices till had been incomplete, especially in the minerals and oil 
space. As such, the benefit of a moderate fall in global commodity prices on 
domestic price level would also be limited. 
  3
• If global oil prices stay at current level, further increase in prices of administered 
oil products will become necessary to contain subsidies. Fertiliser and electricity 
prices will also require an upward revision in view of sharp rise in input costs. 
 
• The high and persistent inflation over the last two years has brought to the fore 
the limitation in arresting inflation in absence of adequate supply response. 
However, monetary policy still has an important role to play in curbing the 
second round effects of supply-led inflation. In face of nominal rigidities and price 
stickiness, there are dangers of accepting elevated inflation level as the new 
normal. 
Outlook on twin deficits for 2011-12 
• In the context of weakening global economy and the likelihood of some spillovers 
to the domestic economy, the twin deficits require close monitoring. 
 
• On current assessment, the fiscal deficit in 2011-12 is likely to overshoot the 
budgeted projections. If the economy slows down beyond what is currently 
anticipated, the resultant revenue erosion could magnify the fiscal slippage. At 
the same time, the fiscal space to support any counter-cyclical policies is more 
limited than what existed at the time of the global crisis of 2008. 
 
• On the other hand, in the baseline scenario, the CAD would remain at a 
sustainable level in 2011-12. Estimates of sustainable CAD suggest a threshold 
of 2.7-3.0 per cent of GDP. Prospects for external sector for 2011-12 remain 
somewhat uncertain as global uncertainties could impinge on commodity prices 
and exchange rate movements. 
 
• The continuance of robust performance of exports in 2010-11 and 2011-12 so far 
faces downside risks. The impact of growth slowdown in the advanced 
economies could partly be mitigated by continued diversification of exports. The 
impact could, nevertheless, turn material in case the slowdown in global growth 
is sharp and widespread. 
 
• With the US and Europe constituting the bulk of Indian software exports, some 
impact from a slowdown in advanced economies can be expected. Several 
pointers suggest that a growth could still be in line with NASSCOM target. Any 
downside impact can become perceptible with a lag if crisis assumes severe 
proportions. 
 
• As regards capital flows, the impact is more difficult to gauge. Capital flows could 
surge or diminish, depending upon the degree of risk aversion. If global crisis 
turns deep, capital flows are more likely to moderate. On the other hand, capital 
flows to India could increase in spells on relative returns basis and due to large 
interest differentials. FDI to India in Q1 of 2011-12 has doubled. 
Medium-term Challenges for the Indian Economy 
While the immediate challenge to sustaining high growth lies in bringing down 
inflation, growth sustainability over medium-term depends on addressing the structural 
bottlenecks. Addressing them is central to raising the potential level of growth in the 
Indian economy. Six medium term challenges enumerated illustratively are: 
• Lowering inflation and inflation expectations to acceptable levels. Monetary 
policy has an important role to play in this, but may find it difficult to deliver the 
objective unless complementary policies have been put in place. These include, 
improved supply response for food and tackling food inflation by breaking the  4
inertial element arising from rising real wages and MSP. Rural wage 
programmes need to be linked with productivity. 
 
• Harnessing technology for agriculture productivity enhancements. This will 
help step up agriculture growth from a trend of around 3 per cent per annum to 4 
per cent. Substantial productivity enhancements are possible through large scale 
introduction of Precision Farming Techniques, combined with local-specific 
fertigation practices, better cultivars, optimal use of biochemicals and water. 
Price incentives such as fertilizer subsidies have distorted its optimal use and led 
to suboptimal investments in its production. As such, there is a rationale for 
extending the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) scheme in scope. 
 
• Maintaining right balance between consumption and investment. There is 
now a need to rebalance demand from consumption to investment by stepping 
up savings in the economy. In order to achieve a 9.0 per cent growth in Twelfth 
Five Year Plan (2012-17) the investment rate of 40.5 per cent would be required 
if ICOR remains unchanged from 4.5 realised during the Eleventh Plan. This 
requires augmenting saving as well as bringing about technological and 
institutional improvements to lower ICOR.  
 
• Facilitating energy security. India’s energy deficit could double by the end of 
the Twelfth Plan. Demand-supply gaps could be particularly large in coal and 
crude oil. Price increases would be necessary to incentivise energy 
conservation, curb demand and support capacity addition. NELP strategy could 
be re-looked and coal block auctions could be front-loaded. As a large amount of 
bank finance is locked in the infrastructure sector, the viability of new 
infrastructure projects need to be ensured.  
 
• Facilitating infrastructure finance. India needs infrastructure investments of 
over US$ 1 trillion during the Twelfth Plan. It needs to be funded by both, public 
and private sectors. Fiscal consolidation and reorientation of expenditure 
towards capital expenditure is required to meet the target. Further measures are 
needed to improve the flow of resources to infrastructure sector on a commercial 
basis. More players are also needed to help corporate bond market acquire 
depth and vibrancy. 
 
• Promoting financial inclusion and inclusive growth. Long-term growth 
sustainability critically depends on achieving inclusive growth. Investments in 
agriculture, infrastructure, human capital formation through education, health and 
skill formation are needed. About one crore people will seek to enter the 
workforce each year over the next decade, posing challenges for employment 
and skilling. Inclusive finance is necessary for supporting the demand for these 
activities.  
The Real Economy 
• Some moderation in growth and significant moderation in inflation from the later 
part of the year is anticipated going forward. However, risk to demand 
compression remains from likely slippage on envisaged fiscal consolidation. 
 
• Following the US sovereign rating downgrade by S&P, oil prices fell. Even with 
this, the August price of the Indian basket of crude is 25 per cent higher than its 
average during 2010-11. Empirical exercise show that a 10 percentage point 
increase in oil price, if passed through fully, would lead to a reduction in real 
GDP growth by about 0.3 percentage point. It would also raise WPI inflation by  5
1.0 percentage point through direct impact and 2.0 percentage points in total 
impact. 
 
• Preliminary estimates based on latest available information show that financial 
savings of the household sector moderated to 9.7 per cent of GDP in 2010-11 
from 12.1 per cent in the previous year. The decline in the financial savings rate 
of the household sector reflected the lower growth in their bank deposits and life 
insurance as well as decline in investment in shares and debentures. 
Households’ financial liabilities increased reflecting higher borrowings from 
commercial banks.  
 
• A holistic review of food management would be helpful in the backdrop of the 
National Food Security Bill (NFSB). This should cover procurement and pricing, 
production and food security, distribution and delivery mechanism. 
Price Situation 
• Drivers of inflation changed during the course of 2010-11. Inflation became 
generalized since December 2010 with significant price pressures in non-food 
manufacturing commodities. 
 
• With a surfeit of liquidity, global commodity prices recovered faster than the 
global economy. This has become a major source of pressure on headline 
inflation in India during 2010-11. Empirical estimates of short run and long run 
elasticities suggest that despite some softening in global commodity prices in 
recent months, upside risks to India’s inflation could persist. 
Money and Credit 
• Money growth was moderate during 2010-11, but picked up during the last 
quarter of 2010-11. Currency expansion was strong during 2010-11. The growth 
in currency demand is explained by high GDP growth, high inflation and low 
deposit rates initially. Over the medium-term, increase in number of ATMs, 
higher social expenditures in rural areas, tax evasions could be amongst the 
factors. Empirically, the relationship of demand for currency with real income and 
prices was found to be very strong.  
 
• In recent years, however, the rate of decline in velocity had accelerated. 
Accentuated liquidity preference and slack credit demand in the aftermath of the 
crisis were reflected in sharp fall in velocity. The velocity of money, however, 
picked up in the past two years and returned to its long term trend that shows a 
secular decline.  
Financial Markets 
• International financial markets witnessed frequent re-pricing of risks during 2010-
11, reflecting persisting uncertainties. Sovereign risk concerns, particularly in the 
Euro Area, affected the financial markets for the greater part of the year. 
 
• Monetary policy transmission across the various segments of the financial 
markets strengthened during 2010-11 and 2011-12 so far with liquidity condition 
shifting to a deficit mode from June 2010.  
Government Finance 
• Combined GFD/GDP for Centre and States fell from 9.3 per cent in 2009-10 to 
7.7 per cent in 2010-11. 
 
• The budgets of the Central and State governments envisage further fiscal 
consolidation during 2011-12. However, concerted efforts would be necessary to  6
avoid fiscal slippages in 2011-12, especially arising from higher expenditure on 
subsidies if global commodity and fuel prices continue at an elevated level. The 
sustainability of lower deficits requires substantial new measures leading to 
expenditure compression and revenue raising 
External Sector 
• India’s balance of payments improved to 2.6 per cent of GDP during 2010-11 
from 2.8 per cent during the preceding year led by a pick-up in exports during the 
second half and a higher invisibles surplus. Thus, India’s CAD is within level of 
sustainable CAD. 
 
• Capital flows to India improved during 2010-11, reflecting the positive perception 
of India’s growth prospects. The composition and volatility of capital flows posed 
some concern. Capital flows at the aggregate level were only weakly sensitive to 
the interest rate differential between India and the rest of the world. 
  
• Financing of CAD for 2011-12 may not pose a problem unless the public debt 
fragilities in the Euro Zone and the growth slowdown in the US significantly 
impact capital flows. On the whole, the BoP situation remains manageable, 
though it necessitates continuous monitoring due to the global uncertainties. 
Working and Operations of the Reserve Bank of India 
Monetary Policy Operations 
• Monetary tightening, introduction of mid-quarter reviews, measures to enhance 
monetary policy communication, introduction of the new base rate system 
replacing the BPLR and the changes made to the monetary policy operating 
procedures helped improve monetary transmission.  
 
• The liquidity conditions changed significantly during Q1 of 2010-11. With the 
recovery of the economy firmly in place, the Reserve Bank moved in a calibrated 
manner in the direction of normalising its policy instruments. 
 
• During 2010-11, the centre’s cash balance with the Reserve Bank and currency 
in circulation were key drivers of autonomous liquidity. The Reserve Bank 
actively managed liquidity so that neither a surplus diluted monetary 
transmission, nor a deficit choked fund flows.  
Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion 
• The Reserve Bank made sustained efforts to increase the penetration of formal 
financial services in unbanked areas, while continuing with its policy of ensuring 
adequate but viable flow of credit to priority sectors of the economy.  
 
• Financial literacy efforts of the Reserve Bank, particularly the outreach 
programme, generated significant interest and exuberant participation from 
public and banks/ financial institutions.  
 
• Regulatory actions to further financial inclusion included changes in KYC norms, 
relaxing branch authorization policy, widening eligible entities to function as 
business correspondents, and requiring minimum percentage of additional 
branches to be opened in unbanked rural centres 
Development and Regulation of Financial Markets 
• The Reserve Bank initiated policy measures to address certain regulatory gaps, 
promote transparency and improve liquidity in the money markets with a view to  7
further strengthen architecture while promoting greater efficiency in the financial 
markets. 
 
• In the derivatives market, the Reserve Bank persisted with a calibrated and 
sequential approach towards launching of new market instruments like Interest 
Rate Futures on 91-days T-bills, CDS on corporate bonds, etc. 
 
• The linkage between the NDF market and the domestic market is weak because 
corporates’ domestic forex forward transaction is based on underlying exposure 
and there is a limit on the aggregate (cash and derivative) positions that banks 
can take. Empirical analysis also brings out a weak causality between the NDF 
and domestic market rates. 
Regulation, Supervision and Financial Stability 
• The Indian banking system remained largely sound and resilient to shocks as 
indicated by various stress tests. The high level of leverage in developed 
countries, which was one of the causal factors behind the global financial crisis, 
continues to remain low in India. The regulatory and supervisory structure of the 
Reserve Bank was further strengthened during the year.  
 
• The important policy decisions for SCBs included, inter alia, strengthening 
countercyclical provisioning norms, measures to avoid excessive leverage in 
housing loan segment, credit support to Micro Finance Institutions(MFIs) etc. 
After the consolidation in the UCB sector there is substantial improvement in 
their financial health. 
Public Debt Management 
• Managing the market borrowing programme for 2011-12 would be a challenge in 
view of tight liquidity conditions and high level of excess SLR holdings of the 
banks. The conduct of the market borrowing programme will be influenced by the 
ability of the Government to rein in the fiscal deficit and its financing by way of 
market borrowings at the budgeted level coupled with the monetary policy 
actions that anchor inflationary expectations. 
 
• The weighted average yield of dated securities rose to 7.92 per cent in 2010-11 
from 7.23 per cent in 2009-10. The weighted average yield of State Government 
securities issued during 2010-11 stood higher at 8.39 per cent as compared to 
8.11 per cent during the previous year. 
Currency Management 
• Notwithstanding the increasing use of technology driven non-cash modes of 
payment, the demand for currency continues to rise.  
 
• The Reserve Bank in pursuing its clean note policy has made provision for a 
steady supply of fresh banknotes in response to the speedier disposal of soiled 
banknotes. 
 
• The economy continues to witness a compositional shift towards higher 
denomination banknotes. The Reserve Bank continued with its efforts to 
strengthen the security features of banknotes and increase public awareness so 
as to address the challenge of counterfeit notes. 
Payment and Settlement Systems and Information Technology 
• Reflecting the need for technologically advanced, secure, efficient, accessible 
payment and settlement systems, the Reserve Bank persisted in its endeavour 
to incentivise electronic modes of payment.   8
 
• Enhanced use of prepaid payment instruments and mobile phone based 
payment services have been promoted with adequate security measures in 
place. 
 
• Driven by the objective of reinforcing RBI as a knowledge hub, the Bank has 
striven towards strategic use of IT and its applications. IT Vision of the Reserve 
Bank of India 2011-17 was prepared by the Bank. 
Governance, Human Resource Development and Organisational Management 
• The Reserve Bank has taken several initiatives in recent years covering 
improved transparency and governance and knowledge initiatives apart from 
recruitment, training of staff, schemes for higher studies and incentive schemes 
for attaining professional qualifications by the staff.  
 
• Some departments of the Reserve Bank were reorganised with a view to 
harnessing greater synergies.  
 
• As part of corporate social responsibility, several green initiatives were 
undertaken by the Bank 
The Reserve Bank’s Accounts for 2010-11 (July-June) 
• The balance sheet of the Reserve Bank expanded significantly during the year, 
mainly reflecting the impact of liquidity management operations undertaken by 
the Bank. On the liability side, the expansion was on account of a large increase 
in notes in circulation as also an increase in banks’ deposits with the Reserve 
Bank in line with the deposit growth in the banking system. 
 
• On the asset side, there was a significant increase in Bank’s portfolio of 
domestic assets in the form of government securities on account of open market 
purchases, repo purchases and disinvestment of Government of India’s surplus 
balance parked with the Reserve Bank. The increase in foreign currency assets 
mainly reflected the valuation effect on the portfolio. 
 
• The income from foreign assets declined for the second successive year, 
reflecting the low interest rates in international markets. The decline in income 
from foreign assets was more than offset by an increase in earnings from 
domestic assets, which was mainly due to the effect of earnings on LAF 
operations, higher availment of ways and means advances (WMA) by the 
Central Government and higher coupon receipt on an increased portfolio of 
government securities. 
 
• The transfer of surplus profit to the Central Government amounted to ` 15,009 
crore.  
 
 
Jaya Mohanty 
Press Release : 2011-2012/300                           Director 