 
? ?  ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null???   ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null?  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
? ???? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? null? /Fax: 91 22 22660358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
May 3, 2011 
Monetary Policy Statement for 2011-12 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I want to welcome all of you 
to this announcement of our Annual Monetary Policy.   
2. The Annual Policy for 2011-12 is set in conditions significantly different from 
those a year ago. Last year’s policy was made in an environment of incipient domestic 
recovery and uncertainty about the state of the global economy. While signs of inflation 
were visible, they were driven primarily by food items. Nonetheless, there was a clear 
risk of food price pressures spilling over into more generalised inflation, as the recovery 
consolidated and domestic resource utilisation rose to levels which stretched 
capacities. Throughout last year, the goal of monetary policy was to nurture the 
recovery in the face of persistent global uncertainty, while trying to contain the spill-over 
of supply side inflation.  
3. The Reserve Bank followed a policy of calibrated tightening last year. This was 
justified by the trend of moderating inflation and consolidating growth in the second and 
third quarters of 2010-11. However, the resurgence of inflation in the last quarter of last 
year became a matter of concern.  Although the trigger for this was the sharp uptrend in 
international commodity prices, the fact that these have quickly passed through into the 
entire range of domestic manufactured goods indicates that pricing power is significant.  
In other words, demand has been strong enough to allow significant pass-through of 
input price increases.  Importantly, this is happening even as there are visible signs of 
moderating growth, particularly in capital goods production and investment spending, 
suggesting that cumulative monetary actions are beginning to have an impact on 
demand.  
4. Thus, three factors have shaped the outlook and monetary strategy for 2011-12.  
• First, global commodity prices, which have surged in recent months are, at 
best, likely to remain firm, and may well increase further over the course of 
the year. This suggests that higher inflation will persist, and may indeed get 
worse. 
• Second, headline and core inflation have significantly overshot even the most 
pessimistic projections over the past few months. This raises concerns about 
inflation expectations becoming unhinged. 
• The third factor, one countering the above forces, is the likely moderation in 
demand, which should help reduce pricing power and the extent of pass-
through of commodity prices. This contra trend cannot be ignored in the 
policy calculation. However, a significant factor influencing aggregate 
demand during the year will be the fiscal situation. The budget estimates 
offered reassurance of a fiscal rollback. However, the critical assumption, that 
?nullnull???nullnullnull?? 2
petroleum and fertiliser subsidies would be capped, is bound to be seriously 
tested at prevailing crude oil prices. Even though an adjustment of domestic 
retail prices may add to the inflation rate in the short run, the Reserve Bank 
believes that this needs to be done as soon as possible. Otherwise, the fiscal 
deficit will widen and will counter the moderating trend in aggregate demand. 
5. The monetary policy trajectory that is being initiated in this Annual Statement is 
based on the following basic premise. Over the long run, high inflation is inimical to 
sustained growth as it harms investment by creating uncertainty. Current elevated rates 
of inflation pose significant risks to future growth. Bringing them down, therefore, even 
at the cost of some growth in the short-run, should take precedence.    
Monetary Policy Stance  
6. Against the above backdrop, the stance of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank 
will be as follows: 
• First, to maintain an interest rate environment that moderates inflation and 
anchors inflation expectations. 
• Second, to foster an environment of price stability that is conducive to 
sustaining growth in the medium-term, coupled with financial stability.  
• Third, to manage liquidity to ensure that it remains broadly in balance, with 
neither a large surplus diluting monetary transmission nor a large deficit 
choking off fund flows. 
Changes in Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy  
7. Before announcing our policy measures, let me make a comment on the 
changes we are making to the operating procedure of monetary policy.  
8. Last July, the Reserve Bank constituted a Working Group to Review the 
Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy. The report of the Group, chaired by our 
Executive Director, Deepak Mohanty, was put out in the public domain in March 2011 
inviting feedback and comments.  
9. Based on the Group’s recommendations, and in light of the feedback received, it 
has been decided to make the following changes to the operating procedure of 
monetary policy:  
• First, the weighted average overnight call money rate will be the operating 
target of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank. 
• Second, there will henceforth be only one independently varying policy rate, 
and that will be the repo rate. This transition to a single independently varying 
policy rate is expected to more accurately signal the monetary policy stance.   
• Third, the reverse repo rate will continue to be operative, but it will be pegged 
at a fixed 100 basis points below the repo rate. Hence, the reverse repo rate 
will no longer be an independent variable. 
• Fourth, we will be instituting a new Marginal Standing Facility (MSF). Banks 
can borrow overnight from the MSF up to one per cent of their respective net 
demand and time liabilities or NDTL. The rate of interest on amounts 
accessed from this facility will be 100 basis points above the repo rate.  
• As per the above scheme, the revised corridor will have a fixed width of 200 
basis points. The repo rate will be in the middle. The reverse repo rate will be 
100 basis points below it, and the MSF rate 100 basis points above it.  3
10. These changes in the operating framework, except that pertaining to the MSF, 
will come into force immediately. The MSF will come into effect from the fortnight 
th
beginning 7 May, 2011.  
Monetary Measures 
11. On the basis of the policy stance that I outlined above, and in accordance with 
changes in operating procedure as set out, we have decided to take the following policy 
measures: 
i) The repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has been increased 
by 50 basis points. Accordingly, it goes up  from 6.75 per cent to 7.25 per 
cent. 
ii) As per the new operating procedure, the reverse repo rate under the LAF, 
determined with a 100 basis point spread below the repo rate, will stand 
adjusted at 6.25 per cent.  
iii) The Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) rate, determined with a spread of 100 
basis points above the repo rate, gets calibrated at 8.25 per cent.   
iv) The Bank Rate remains at 6.0 per cent. 
v) The cash reserve ratio (CRR) remains unchanged at 6 per cent of NDTL of 
scheduled banks.  
Savings Bank Deposit Interest Rate 
12. Let me now turn to the savings bank deposit interest rate on which there has 
been a lot of media comment over the last week. A week ago, the Reserve Bank put 
out a discussion paper debating the pros and cons of this proposal. We will review the 
policy of deregulating the savings bank deposit rate based on the feedback that we get.   
13. Pending a final decision on that, we have decided to increase the savings bank 
deposit interest rate from the present 3.5 per cent to 4.0 per cent with immediate effect. 
Expected Outcomes 
14. As regards outcomes, the above monetary policy actions are expected to:  
• First, contain inflation by reining in demand side pressures, and anchor 
inflation expectations; and 
• Second, the actions are expected to sustain growth in the medium-term 
by containing inflation.  
15. Let me give you some guidance for the period forward. The Reserve Bank's 
baseline inflation projections are that inflation will remain elevated, close to the March 
2011 level over the first half of 2011-12, before declining. These projections factor in an 
upward revision of petrol and diesel prices. While the persistence of inflation over the 
next few months has been incorporated into this policy, the Reserve Bank will continue 
to persevere with its anti-inflationary stance.    
Overview  
16. I now want to give you an overview of the global and domestic macroeconomic 
developments that guided our monetary policy stance, and our growth and inflation 
projections.  
Global Outlook 
17. On the global front, recovery is expected to sustain in 2011 even as it is 
projected to moderate marginally from its 2010 pace due to the phasing out of the fiscal 
stimulus, and high oil and other commodity prices. Growth in emerging market 
economies is also expected to decelerate on account of monetary tightening and rising  4
commodity prices. The advanced economies are facing inflation pressures from high 
commodity prices, while inflation pressures for the emerging market economies are 
stemming from both strong domestic demand and high commodity prices.  
The Indian Economy 
Growth  
18. Turning to the domestic macroeconomic situation, the Indian economy is 
estimated to have grown by 8.6 per cent last year. Agricultural growth was above trend, 
following a good monsoon. The index of industrial production (IIP), which grew by 10.7 
per cent during the first half of last year, moderated subsequently, bringing down the 
overall growth for April-February 2010-11 to 7.8 per cent. Particularly significant were 
the slowdown in capital goods production and investment spending.  
19. Going forward, high oil and other commodity prices and the impact of the 
Reserve Bank’s anti-inflationary monetary stance will moderate growth. Based on the 
assumption of a normal monsoon, and crude oil prices averaging US$110 a barrel over the 
full year 2011-12, our baseline projection of real GDP growth for 2011-12, for policy 
purposes, is around 8 per cent.  
Inflation  
20. Inflation has been, and remains, a primary macroeconomic concern. Last year, 
inflation was driven by a combination of structural and transitory factors. Based on 
drivers of inflation, the year gone by, could broadly be divided into three periods.  
• In the first period from April to July 2010, WPI increased by 3.5 per cent, and 
this was driven largely by food items.  
• During the second period from August to November 2010, WPI increase 
decelerated to 1.8 per cent, with the major driver being non-food primary 
articles.   
• In the third period, from December 2010 to March 2011, WPI increased 
sharply by 3.4 per cent, driven primarily by non-food manufactured products.  
• Inflation pressures, which initially emanated from food, clearly became 
generalised as the year progressed.   
21. Going forward, the inflation outlook will be shaped by the following factors:  
• The first factor is, when administered fuel and power group prices might be 
revised and by how much. 
• Second, the outlook for crude oil prices in the near future is uncertain given 
the geopolitical situation in the Middle East and North Africa. In any case, the 
likelihood of oil prices moderating significantly is low. 
• The third factor that will shape the inflation outlook is the sharp increase in 
the prices of several important industrial raw materials such as minerals, 
fibres, rubber, coal and crude oil. In addition, there is also upward pressure 
on wages. To the extent the increase in input prices translates to output 
prices, it will have an influence on the inflation path. 
• Finally, the behaviour of the monsoon will be a critical factor in shaping 
inflation expectations on the way forward. 
22. Keeping in view the domestic demand-supply balance, the global trend in 
commodity prices, and the likely demand scenario, our baseline projection for WPI 
inflation for March 2012 is 6 per cent with an upward bias.    5
23. As regards the trajectory over the year, inflation is expected to remain at an 
elevated level in the first half of the year, before gradually moderating to 6 per cent by 
March 2012. This trajectory is conditional on appropriate policy actions  over the year. 
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
24. Liquidity conditions remained abnormally tight for much of last year owing to a 
combination of structural and frictional factors. The LAF corridor stayed almost entirely 
in the injection mode during the year. You will recall that the Reserve Bank had 
instituted a number of measures to ease the excessive tightness in the system.  
25. Liquidity conditions have eased significantly in recent weeks, following a sharp 
reduction in government cash balances, and moderation in the credit-deposit ratio of 
banks. The liquidity situation is now within the comfort zone of the Reserve Bank. 
External Sector 
26. A brief, albeit important, comment about the external sector. Exports showed 
remarkable buoyancy in the last quarter of last fiscal. The current account deficit (CAD) 
was 3.1 per cent of GDP for the first three quarters, April-December 2010. Factoring in 
the better performance in the last quarter, CAD is now estimated to have moderated to 
around 2.5 per cent of GDP for the full year, 2010-11 as compared with 2.8 per cent for 
the year before, 2009-10.  
Risk Factors  
27. Now let me highlight the risks to our growth and inflation projections:  
• First, there are several downside risks to global growth at this stage such as: 
(a) sovereign debt problem in the euro area, (b) high commodity prices, 
especially oil prices, (c) possible abrupt rise in long-term interest rates in 
advanced economies with implications for fiscal adjustment; and (d) 
accentuation of inflationary pressures in emerging market economies. Should 
the global recovery slacken because of any or some of these factors, it will 
impact our economy through trade, finance and confidence channels.    
• Second, global commodity prices are a significant risk factor for both 
domestic growth and inflation. The future path of crude oil prices is uncertain.  
• Third, the budgeted fiscal deficit for the current year gives some comfort on 
the demand front. However, the achievement of the fiscal targets set out in 
the budget could be challenged by the higher subsidy burden stemming from 
higher international crude oil prices.  
• Fourth, persistently high food prices are likely to exert sustained upward 
pressure on wages, thus transmitting through to wider cost pressure on 
prices. 
• Finally, if oil and commodity prices remain elevated, both the level of current 
account deficit, and its financing could pose a challenge.  
Developmental and Regulatory Polices  
28. As is the standard practice, this Annual Monetary Policy Statement also includes 
developmental and regulatory policies. Let me briefly touch upon some of the important 
initiatives.  
29. I will start with the Malegam Committee Report on Regulation of Micro Finance 
Institutions.  
• The Reserve Bank has broadly accepted the framework of regulations  6
recommended by the Malegam Committee. We have, however, adjusted 
some of the parameters recommended by the Committee.   
• Bank loans to all MFIs, including NBFCs working as MFIs on or after April 1, 
2011, will be eligible for classification as priority sector loans if, and only if, 
they conform to the regulations formulated by the Reserve Bank.  
• As recommended by the Malegam Committee, the Reserve Bank has also 
decided to appoint a Committee to review the priority sector lending 
classification.  
30. A broad goal driving our financial inclusion initiative is to provide banking access 
to all villages with population of over 2000 by March 2012. There are 72,800 villages 
identified as falling into this category. We are asking banks to ensure that at least 25 
per cent of the new branches being opened during this year are located in tier 5 and tier 
6 centres.   
31. In  the area of financial markets, there are three important initiatives: 
• First, the Reserve Bank will shortly issue the final guidelines on credit default 
swaps.   
• Second, the period of short sale in government securities will be extended 
from the existing five days to a maximum of three months.   
• Third, FIIs will be allowed to cancel and rebook up to 10 per cent of the 
market value of the portfolio as at the beginning of the financial year.  
32. Moving on to regulatory measures for commercial banks, I want to highlight two 
measures: 
• First, the provisioning requirements on certain categories of non-performing 
advances and restructured advances will be enhanced.  
• Second, investment by banks in liquid schemes of debt oriented mutual funds 
will be subject to a prudential cap of 10 per cent of their net worth as on 
March 31 of the previous year.  
33. I invite you to please read the policy document for a full listing of our 
developmental and regulatory measures.  
34. Before I close, I want to reiterate what I said earlier, by making a brief comment 
on the growth-inflation trade off, an issue that has been widely debated in the run up to 
this policy. High and persistent inflation undermines growth by creating uncertainty for 
investors, and driving up inflation expectations. An environment of price stability is a 
pre-condition for sustaining growth in the medium-term. Reining in inflation should 
therefore take precedence even if there are some short-term costs by way of lower 
growth".  
 
       Ajit Prasad 
Press Release : 2010-2011/1592                   Assistant General Manager 