Government of India announces issue of Floating Rate Bonds, 2014
May 14, 2003
The Government of India have announced sale of "Floating Rate Bonds, 2014" for an
aggregate amount of Rs 5,000 crore (nominal) by auction.
Up to 5% of the notified amount of the sale of the bonds will be allotted to eligible
individuals and institutions as per the Scheme for Non-Competitive Bidding Facility in the
Auction of Government Securities.
The Floating Rate Bonds will be of 11-years tenure and will be issued at par. (i.e. at
Rs100.00 per cent).  The bonds will carry an interest rate, which is calculated by adding a
'spread' to a variable base rate. The 'spread'   will be decided in the auction to be conducted
by Reserve Bank of India and will remain unchanged during the currency of the bonds. The
variable base rate will be the average rate of the implicit yields at cut-off prices emerging in the
immediate previous three auctions of ‘Government of India 364 day Treasury Bills’ held prior
to the relative annual coupon reset period. The interest will be paid every half year.  The base
rate for calculation of interest for the first coupon period commencing from May 20, 2003 to
May 19, 2004 as per the aforesaid formula is 4.95 per cent (please see enclosed illustration).
The base rate for the subsequent annual coupon periods, worked out as per the aforesaid
formula, will be announced by RBI on or before the commencement of the respective coupon
period.
There will be no floor or cap on the interest rate on the Floating Rate Bonds.
In the unlikely event of 364-day Treasury Bill auctions being discontinued during the
currency of the FRB, the applicable variable base rate will be the average of the Yield to
Maturity (YTM) rate prevailing for one year Government of India Security as on last three
reporting Fridays prior to the commencement of the relative annual coupon period worked out
in consultation with the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India
(FIMMDA). In case particular Friday/s is/are holiday/s, the yield to maturity rates on the
previous working day shall be taken. This rate will be announced by RBI on or before the
commencement of the relative annual coupon period.
The Floating Rate Bonds are being issued by the Government of India, on auction basis for
the fourth time. The bonds provide hedge against interest rate risk, offering returns linked to
short term yield.
The auction will be conducted by the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai Office,  Fort,
Mumbai on Monday, May 19, 2003. Applicants who wish to bid for the bonds will have to
clearly indicate in the prescribed form (obtainable from the Regional Director, RBI, Mumbai
Office, Fort, Mumbai) the nominal value of the bonds applied for, and the 'spread' expected by
them (up to two decimal places) on the base rate. Bids in prescribed form should be deposited
at RBI, Mumbai Office, Fort, Mumbai, on May 19, 2003 in the appropriate tender box.
However, the competitive bids by the NDS members should be submitted only in electronic
format using NDS. The non-competitive bids should be submitted in the prescribed physical
form and deposited in the appropriate tender box at RBI, Mumbai Office, Fort, Mumbai. All
bids should be submitted by 12.30 P.M. On the basis of bids received, RBI will determine themaximum spread, at which offers will be accepted. The auction will be conducted by using the
Uniform Price Method where bids offered up to and including the maximum spread as
determined by Reserve Bank of India will be accepted. Bids quoted at spreads higher than the
spread determined by the Reserve Bank of India will be rejected.
The results of the auction will be announced on May 19, 2003 and payment by successful
bidders will be during the banking hours on May 20, 2003. The bonds will be repaid at par on
May 20, 2014.
Bids for underwriting of the Bonds under auction can be submitted by the ‘Primary Dealers
in the Government Securities Market’ by 12.30 p.m. on Saturday, May 17, 2003 to the Chief
General Manager, Internal Debt Management Cell, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office ,
Fort, Mumbai 400 001.
For any further clarifications, interested investors may approach Chief General Manager,
Reserve Bank of India, IDM Cell, Central Office, Mumbai.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release: 2002-2003/1163