ARCs to submit Registration Application
to RBI by March 20
March 7, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India has notified the format of the application form which is to
be submitted by the securitisation companies or reconstruction companies. These companies
are required to apply to the Reserve Bank for registration under Section 3 of the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002. The application form can be accessed on the Reserve Bank's web site
www.rbi.org.in.
The Reserve Bank has also clarified that those securitisation companies or
reconstruction companies desirous of seeking registration from the Reserve Bank can
download the format of the application form from the Reserve Bank’s web site. The duly
filled in application form with all the relevant annexures/ supporting documents, may be
submitted to the Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Department of Non-Banking
Supervision, Central Office, Reserve Bank of India, Centre 1, World Trade Centre, Cuffe
Parade, Colaba, Mumbai 400 005 so as to reach him latest by March 20, 2003. The last date
is applicable to companies existing as on June 21, 2002.
The Reserve Bank has advised that every securitisation company or reconstruction
company applying for the Reserve Bank's registration would have a minimum owned fund of
Rs 2 crore. Owned Fund for the purpose of registration would mean the aggregate of paid up
equity capital, paid up preference capital to the extent it is compulsorily convertible into
equity capital and free reserves other than revaluation reserves, credit balance in the profit
and loss account as reduced by accumulated balance of loss, unamortised deferred revenue
expenditure, book value of intangible assets and under/short provision against non-
performing assets/diminution in value of investments, and over-recognition of income, if any,
and further reduced by the book value of the  shares acquired in a securitisation company or
reconstruction company,  and exposures to  related parties as defined in  the accounting
standards and guidance notes issued by the Institute of Chartered  Accountants of India and
further reduced by the items qualified by the auditors in   their report on the financial
statements of the securitisation companies or reconstruction companies. The Reserve Bank
has also clarified that it will shortly notify the final guidelines and directions.
P. V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/928