Report of the Review Group on the Working of the Local Area Bank Scheme
August 26, 2003
 The Local Area Bank Scheme was introduced in August 1996 pursuant to the
announcement of the then Finance Minister in his budget speech.  Following this, guidelines
for setting up of Local Area Banks (LABs) in the private sector were announced by the
Reserve Bank on August 24, 1996.  These banks were expected to bridge the gaps in credit
availability and enhance the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi urban areas
and provide efficient and competitive services in their area of operation. Five LABs have
been established.
As no comprehensive review of the LAB scheme had been undertaken  since the
issuance of guidelines in 1996, a Review Group with outside experts was appointed by RBI
in July 2002 to study and make recommendations on the LAB Scheme.  The Review Group
comprised Shri G. Ramachandran former Finance Secretary as Chairman,  Shri M.G. Bhide,
Chairman, NIBM, Pune as Member and Shri A.V. Sardesai, the then CGM in-Charge, RBI,
RPCD as Member Secretary  and Convener of  the Group.
The terms of reference of the Group were to examine whether the scheme of Local
Area Banks has fulfilled its objectives, and whether the LABs licensed so far have served the
purpose for which they were set up and   in the light of experience so far, to examine whether
the scheme should continue, and whether fresh applications for setting up of LABs should be
considered by RBI.  The Review Group has submitted its Report on October 1, 2002.  It has
drawn attention to the structural infirmities in the concept of the LABs and recommended that
there should be no licensing of new LABs. The Review Group has drawn attention  to  the
weaknesses in the concept of the Local Area Bank model ab initio particularly to  size of
LABs , capital base, inherent inability to absorb the losses which are bound to arise in the
course of business, risk prone credit portfolio, inability to diversify and derisk   the business
model in view of  size and location etc.  The Review Group has expressed the view that there
are  weaknesses  in the  LAB model.  The Group has, therefore, suggested that the
weaknesses of the  LAB model need to be addressed without delay and has  simultaneously
suggested certain measures to enable LABs to  grow on healthy lines. These measures
include strengthening of capital base, increase in the capital adequacy requirement,
prohibition of engagements of agents by LABs for achieving business outreach, prohibition
on trading in Government Securities and other papers during their formative years and
considering scheduling of LABs,  availability of refinance, liberalised branch licensing and
branch expansion policy etc., only after they reach higher capital base and capital adequacy.
The report of the Review Group was placed on the RBI website on October 26, 2002
inviting observations from different quarters to reach us by November 30, 2002.  The Reserve
Bank had received comments/suggestions  from  different Local Area Banks and individuals.
The recommendations of the Review Group have been examined by the Reserve Bank
in consultation with Government of India and after taking into account the suggestions
received from different quarters. Most of the recommendations of the Review Group have
been accepted for implementation. It has also been decided that henceforth there should be no
licensing of new LABs.P.V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/271