Assess Fiscal Risk of State Government Guarantees:
Suggests State Finance Secretaries Panel
March 13, 2003
A large number of State Government guarantees are effectively in the nature of debt
and provision for repayment of such guarantees should be made in the budget itself. For
others, the state governments should make a proper assessment of the fiscal risk on account
of guarantees and limit such risks through ( i) fixing ceiling on debt servicing plus
devolvement on fisc on account of guarantees, (ii) augmenting and strengthening guarantees
redemption fund through general provision and risk based guarantee commission, and (iii)
taking administrative measures to ensure financial discipline on the part of state level
undertakings. The states should also regularly publish data regarding guarantees in the
specified format in the budget. These were some of the recommendations made by a group of
state finance secretaries in their report submitted to the Reserve Bank of India.
Constitution of the Group
The Group was set up to examine the fiscal risk of guarantees extended by the State
Governments, as per a decision taken in May 2001. The decision was taken in view of the
rising trend in outstanding guarantees of the state governments - from Rs. 40,317 crore at
end-March 1992 to Rs.1,69,562 crore as at end-March 2001. The group consisted of Finance
Secretaries from Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya and Uttar
Pradesh. The group also had members from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India
and the Planning Commission. The Chief General Manager-in Charge of Internal Debt
Management Cell, Reserve Bank of India was the convenor. The Group held extensive
discussions with the financial institutions and State Finance Secretaries. The draft Report was
also discussed with the State Finance Secretaries in June 2002. The Group submitted the
Final Report in July 2002 to the Reserve Bank which again discussed it with the State
Finance Secretaries on January 9, 2003.
Recommendations
Major recommendations of the Group are:
Assessment of Fiscal Risk
The Group studied the methodology for assessing fiscal risk of guarantee obligations
prevailing internationally. Whereas the Group recognised the importance of classifying
guarantees in terms of their default probabilities, it felt that as there was a spurt in guarantees
in India only after the mid-1990s and the magnitude of devolvement of these guarantees
would only be making itself apparent now.  The past default data would, thus, not help to
predict reasonably the default probability of the recent guarantees. Therefore, in the current
Indian context, classifying guarantees in terms of their default probabilities was not
considered a viable alternative. Further, more sophisticated methods like option pricing,
actuarial techniques, etc., required a reliable and substantial database which was lacking in
India.  Besides, for states to use any valuation and classification technique easily, the
emphasis had to be on simplicity and uniformity.  The Group, therefore, suggested two
methodologies for assessing fiscal risk of guarantees and ways to provide for them.II
Full Value on the Budget  - The Group recommended that guarantees, which are effectively
in the nature of direct liabilities and the risk of which is assessed at 100 per cent, viz., as
equal to debt, should be reported separately. Such guarantees should be clubbed with debt
while assessing the debt profile of the State for all purposes.   The Group noted that the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India had already adopted a similar approach in the
discussions with the States under the Medium Term Fiscal Reforms Programme. According
to the Group, for such guarantees which were more like debt, repayment provision should be
made in the budget itself.
Partial Value on the Budget  - For guarantees other than those mentioned above, the Group
recommended classification of the projects/ activities as high risk, medium risk, low risk and
very low risk and assigning appropriate risk weights. The assessment of risk should be done
at the State level.  For making such assessment, the States could adopt various options.
Making use of credit rating of bonds would be one option. The Government of India had
already instructed that all bonds issued in future with government guarantee would have to be
compulsorily credit rated. State Governments should, if necessary using the assistance of
rating agencies, assess the risk sans guarantee. The rating, sans guarantee, could then be used
for the purpose of classifying the guarantees into high risk, medium risk, low risk and very
low risk.  Such exercise may be undertaken for both bonds and loans.  The States would then
have to use their judgement to assign devolvement probability to each risk category, say 5 per
cent for very low risk, 25 per cent for low risk, 50 per cent for medium risk and 75 per cent
for high risk. The devolvement probability could then be applied to the underlying liabilities
which were guaranteed to estimate the devolvement obligation, which could then be added to
debt service obligation to arrive at the annual fiscal burden of debt and guarantees.
Ceiling on Guarantees
The Eleventh Finance Commission had suggested that the States should aim to limit interest
payments to 18 per cent of revenue receipts. The Group recommended a modification in this
suggestion to include possible devolvement on account of guarantee obligations of the states
so that the total obligation of states did not exceed 20 per cent of their revenue receipts. This,
according to the Group, would automatically serve as a measure for capping guarantees. For
many states where guarantees outstanding already at very high level, it was imperative to
place limits on incremental guarantees in any year in relation to revenue receipts.
Fiscal Discipline on State Level Undertakings
It was also felt that apart from assessing the fiscal risk and making provisions, the State
Government should take administrative measures to discipline the state level undertakings
whose borrowings were guaranteed. The Group suggested an arrangement under which the
states made provisions to meet possible shortfalls in project earnings. The Group
recommended one of the following two methods to be used at the discretion of the state
governments: The borrowing SPV/PSU/Co-operative/Local body be made to set up escrow
accounts with contributions from project earnings on a predetermined and regular schedule –
in the event of any revenue shortfall, repayments to the guaranteed bond/loan holders could
be made out of these accounts; or user charges might be enhanced suitably after a proper
evaluation and allow the enhanced amount to go into a contingency fund/provision in the
books of the borrowing institution, to be accessed in case of shortfalls in revenue.
Transparency and Disclosure
The Group was of the view that the states need to publish data regarding guarantees
regularly, in the specified format in the Budget. Both - the annual sanctions of guarantees andIII
outstanding amount need to be disclosed separately.  The Group also recommended that the
states might disclose the information on default, invocation and payments made under
invoked guarantees. Further, in order that a proper database was created for capturing all
guarantees incurred by the State, a tracking unit for guarantees might be designated in the
Ministry of Finance at the state level.
Guarantees in favour of Central Financial Institutions
The Group noted that a large number of guarantees were in favour of all India
financial institutions, such as, National Housing Bank (NHB), Housing and Urban
Development Corporation (HUDCO), National Co-operative Development Corporation
(NCDC), Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), etc. It noted that while lending institutions were
increasingly becoming conscious about the importance of proper risk assessment of projects,
some institutions continued to insist on guarantees, either because it was mandated in the
Acts governing them or as a conscious policy. The Group studied such provisions in the
Act/policies of major institutions and recommended that the need for extending guarantees in
favour of central financing agencies owned by the Government should be examined and even
done away with. The Group also recommended that where guarantee was taken as credit
enhancement, it should be reflected in reduction in the lending rate.
Automatic Debit Mechanism
The Group recommended that the automatic debit mechanism in case of repayments
to National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) both under the Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) and outside the RIDF should be discontinued and
treated as similar to any other off-market borrowing of the State Government from financial
institutions.
Sustainability of Guarantees and Debt
The Group recommended that in order to have a norm in terms of debt sustainability
the underlying guarantee liabilities could be mapped out on an annual basis and likely amount
of devolvement could be estimated for future years. The total of such likely devolvement
during the life of the guarantees could then be treated as normal debt and clubbed together
with debt obligations. Together, the liability could be measured as a ratio of State Domestic
Product (SDP) to ensure that debt plus likely devolvement on guarantees during its life was
sustainable.
Availability of the Report
The full text of the Report is available at www.rbi.org.in. The Report will also be
published in the monthly RBI Bulletin.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/952