RBI accepts Panel Recommendations on State Finances:
Implements New Formulae from March 3
March 4 2003
 Rationalisation of the formula for fixing the limits for Ways and Means Advances
(WMA) for the States on the basis of average revenue receipts of the preceding three years,
charging higher rate of interest on drawals beyond 90 days, liberalisation of Special WMA
scheme, a slightly longer period before stopping payments if the States remained in overdraft
and a penal rate of interest if overdraft exceeds 100 per cent of WMA limits, were the main
recommendations of the Ramachandran Committee.
Under Section 17(5) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Reserve Bank of
India provides Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to the States to help them tide over the
temporary mismatches in the cash flow of their receipts and payments.  There are two types
of WMA - normal and special.  While normal WMA are clean advances, special WMA are
secured advances provided against the pledge of Government of India securities.  Any
amount drawn by a State in excess of WMA is called overdraft. As per the existing Overdraft
Regulations Scheme, no State is allowed to run an overdraft with the Reserve Bank for more
than 12 consecutive working days.  In case a State remains in overdraft beyond 12
consecutive working days, the Reserve Bank and its agencies stop payment in respect of that
State. The Reserve Bank and its agencies also stop payments in respect of a State in case it is
in overdraft in excess of the 100 per cent of the WMA limit for more than five consecutive
working days.
The Governor, Reserve Bank of India had, in October 2002, constituted an Advisory
Committee to review the existing system of normal WMA, special WMA and overdraft to the
State Governments. Shri C. Ramachandran, former Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of
Finance, Government of India and former Executive Director, Asian Development Bank was
the Chairman of the Advisory Committee, with Shri Suman Bery, Director-General, National
Council for Applied Economic Research as the member and Shri H. R. Khan, Chief General
Manager, Internal Debt Management Cell, Reserve Bank of India as the Member-Secretary.
The Committee was also advised to consider rationalisation, if warranted, revision of
limits, keeping in view the need of the State Governments with particular reference to their
transactions with the Reserve Bank.  The Committee was further required to examine other
aspects related to cash management of State Governments.
The Committee held extensive discussions with officials of State Governments,
Ministry of Finance (Government of India), Planning Commission, Finance Commission and
other experts/officials. The Committee submitted its Report in January 2003.
 
The Committee observed that due to increasing resource gap arising out of deep
seated structural problems, persistent use of higher amount of WMA on a near permanent
basis and frequent resort to overdraft had become a regular feature for many states. The
Committee considered continuing the existing liberal disposition for some more time because
of the fiscal stress presently being faced by the States. It, however, observed that the State
Governments should initiate necessary corrective measures urgently and revert to use of
WMA facilities only for meeting the temporary liquidity mismatches rather than as a regular
budgetary resource and to resort to overdraft only under exceptional circumstances.  TheCommittee also suggested that the Finance Commission, the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance might review the whole gamut of issues that affect State Finances in a
holistic manner.
 
The major recommendations of the Committee were:
 
a) The WMA limits should be fixed on the basis of average revenue receipts of the
preceding three years rather than revenue receipts and capital expenditure as was
done so far and that such limits should be annually revised.
b) The rate of interest on normal WMA should be at Bank Rate for the first 90 days
and one percentage point above the Bank Rate for period exceeding 90 days as
against the present system of charging interest at Bank Rate.
c) Special WMA scheme should be liberalised in terms of lower margin and the rate
of interest on special WMA should also be one percentage point below the Bank
Rate as against Bank Rate at present.
d) The stipulation regarding the number of days that a State can be in overdraft
beyond which payments are stopped might be enhanced to 14 consecutive
working days from 12 as at present.
e) The maximum number of consecutive working days that a State could be in
overdraft in excess of 100 per cent of WMA limit would continue to be five.
However, the maximum number of working days in a calendar quarter for which a
State could avail overdraft should be restricted to 30 working days.
f) The rate of interest on overdraft upto 100 per cent of WMA limit should be three
percentage points above the Bank Rate and for overdraft in excess of the 100 per
cent of WMA limit should be six percentage points above the Bank Rate as
against two percentage points above the Bank Rate at present.
g) The Reserve Bank should disseminate, on a weekly basis, State-wise data on net
RBI credit to State Governments.
h) Interest payments on loans including that on WMA/overdraft drawings should be
charged to the State's account at monthly rests.
i) The Reserve Bank should help the States in improving their cash management
practices.
 
Consultations with the Government State Officials
 
The recommendations of the Committee were discussed in detail with the State
Finance Secretaries in the Conference held at the Reserve Bank on January 9, 2003. There
was general agreement on most of the recommendations and the consensus was to implement
the recommendations with certain modifications.  These were: (a) The number of days that a
State could be in overdraft in a quarter might be extended from 30 working days to 36
working days; (b) The decision on dissemination of data be deferred till further examination;
and (c) The recommendations be made applicable from March  2003 rather than April  2003.
As recommended by the State Finance Secretaries, the Reserve Bank has decided to
implement the recommendations of the Ramachandran Committee with effect from March 3,
2003. This would give the States the benefit of higher limits in the last month of the current
fiscal year.  The recommendation regarding the limit of 36 days that a State can be in
overdraft in a calendar quarter, would however be implemented from April 1, 2003. The
recommendation of publishing State-wise data on net RBI credit would be further examined.
2 Availability of the Report
 
The Report is available on the website at www.rbi.org.in. It would also be published in the
monthly RBI Bulletin.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/915
3