RBI issues Final Guidelines and Directions for SCRCs
April 23, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India today issued the final guidelines and directions to
Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies (SCRCs). The guidelines have been
finalised taking into account the feedback received from banks, financial institutions and others.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank had issued draft guidelines on December 18, 2002,
soliciting views of all concerned.
The regulations would facilitate the smooth formation and functioning of Securitisation
Companies and Reconstruction Companies. The guidelines and directions cover the aspects
concerning asset reconstruction and securitisation as also those relating to registration, owned
funds, permissible business, operational structure for giving effect to the business of
securitisation and asset reconstruction, deployment of surplus funds, internal control systems,
prudential norms, disclosure requirements, etc., for these companies.
In terms of the provisions of The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, securitisation companies are required to raise
funds through the instrument of security receipts. The Reserve Bank has, however, clarified that
the Securitisation Company and Reconstruction Company can raise funds through the instrument
of security receipts by the trust/s set up by them.
In addition to the guidelines and directions, which are mandatory, the Reserve Bank has
also issued guidance notes of recommendatory nature covering aspects relating to acquisition of
assets, issue of security receipts etc.
The Reserve Bank is in the process of framing a set of standard guidelines in the matter
of takeover of the management, sale or lease of whole or part of the business of the borrower.
The Reserve Bank has cautioned the Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies
against exercising the measures of take over of management, sale or lease of the borrowers'
business as provided for in Section 9 of The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, until guidelines in this regard are notified
by the Reserve Bank of India. As regards enforcement of security interest, Securitisation
Companies and Reconstruction Companies may follow the Security Interest (Enforcement)
Rules, 2002 notified by the Government of India as also the relevant provisions in The
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002.
The Reserve Bank had already issued the format of the application form for issue of a
Certificate of Registration earlier on March 7, 2003, as the last date for making application to the
Reserve Bank for existing companies was March 20, 2003. Companies desirous of commencing
the business of securitisation and reconstruction have to apply in the prescribed format, which
can be downloaded from the Reserve Bank of India's website www.rbi.org.inBackground
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002, was enacted by the Government of India on June 21, 2002 for regulation of
securitisation and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of security interest by
secured creditors, including Securitisation or Reconstruction Companies (SC/RC). The Act
extends to the whole of India. The Act envisaged a new class of companies, Securitisation
Companies or Reconstruction Companies, which as provided in the Act, should not undertake
any activity other than that of securitisation and asset reconstruction.
The Act has vested with the Reserve Bank the powers to register such companies and
frame regulations to oversee their functioning covering areas such as registration, owned fund,
prudential norms, capital adequacy, aggregate value and type of assets to be acquired, etc. The
Reserve Bank had issued draft guidelines on December 18, 2002, soliciting views of all
concerned. The Reserve Bank may, if it considers it necessary for avoiding any hardship to
Securitisation Company or Reconstruction Company or for any other just and sufficient reason
exempt all Securitisation Companies or Reconstruction Companies or a particular Securitisation
Company or Reconstruction Company or class of Securitisation Companies or Reconstruction
Companies, from all or any of the provisions of these regulations and directions either generally
or for any specified period, subject to such conditions as it may impose.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1088