State Finance Secretaries reaffirm
Commitment to Fiscal Discipline
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, addressed the twelfth
Conference of the State Finance Secretaries held in the Reserve Bank of India on
August 1, 2003. Finance Secretaries of most of the states were present. Shri D.C.
Gupta, Finance Secretary, Smt. Aruna Makhan, CGA and other Government and
Planning Commission officials attended the meeting.  Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India chaired the conference. Other senior Reserve Bank
officials also participated.
Highlighting the benefits of the conference of state finance secretaries, the
Governor stated that it brought together the states, the centre and the Reserve Bank
for a free and fair exchange of views and to reflect upon policy issues. The Reserve
Bank of India has been hosting the state finance secretaries' conference since
November 1997. While the states, the centre and the Reserve Bank had different
responsibilities, they had one common objective of getting the country's growth rate
accelerated by strengthening fiscal balance. They shared the responsibilities of
achieving this objective through this forum, he pointed out. The Governor expressed
satisfaction that the central Government had taken several initiatives to find longer
term solutions to the issues concerning the states and the centre after discussing them
at this forum. Evolution of debt swap mechanism to provide relief to the states by
switching high cost debt with low cost debt, evolving a scheme of ways and means
advances that gave more flexibility to the states but at the same time imposed certain
financial discipline on them, allowing the state Governments to raise market
borrowings through auction method, sensitising the state governments regarding the
issue of the contingent risk of guarantees were some illustrations of the decisions that
had emerged out of the discussions held in these conferences.
In his inaugural remarks, Dr. Jalan said that there were many positive factors
in the Indian economy at present, including strong balance of payments, low inflation,
low interest rates and excellent monsoon. Prospect for growths were also bright.
There was, however, one major factor of concern and that was the high fiscal deficit
at the central and state levels. The Governor, however, appreciated that there was
much greater effort to tackle this problem now and noted that the recent passing of the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill at the centre marked a sea-change
in the approach to the problem. The Act, when implemented, will bring greater
transparency and disclosure in the fiscal affairs of the Government, the Governor
remarked and urged State Governments to adopt the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Bill on the lines of the centre in their respective States.
Referring to the market borrowing programme of the Government, the
Governor pointed out that states as well as the centre have, in the past couple of years,
been able to raise money at interest rates which are historically low. For instance, 10-
year money has been raised at 5.7 per cent for the centre and 6.2 per cent for the
states. He, however, cautioned that the ability to raise funds at a lower cost should not
bring in complacency because debt once incurred must be repaid. Stating that the two
tranches of debt swap conducted for the states so far have evoked good response, the
Governor mentioned that the government and the Reserve Bank would take a
quarterly view of the market conditions and put through further auctions for debtswap scheme of the states. Cautioning the states, however, he stressed that
containment of debt was as important as reduction in the cost of debt. In the context
of market borrowing programme, the Governor urged the states to pay serious
attention to debt servicing of state guaranteed bonds - whether they be SLR or non-
SLR bonds or bonds issued by public sector undertakings. When the states directly
approach the markets for funds, there was zero tolerance to defaults, he said and urged
that together, it was our collective responsibility to find a solution for the issue of
servicing of debt.
While addressing state finance secretaries, Shri D.C. Gupta, Finance
Secretary, emphasised control of expenditure to consolidate the fisc.  He
acknowledged that in the current year, states have made efforts to contain the size of
their plans. Unrealistic size of the state fisc affected the ratings of the states as well as
the centre, he pointed out.  Shri Gupta also urged the states to exercise control in
expenditure and to evolve better cash management systems. Stating that the state
problems required a multi-dimensional solution, Shri Gupta stressed the need for
evolving a consensus solution and chalking out of a roadmap for medium term
reforms package at the state level. Stating that it was for the states to prioritise their
goals in this road map, Shri Gupta mentioned that there should be no scope for back-
sliding once the reform package was adopted. Highlighting the problem of negotiated
loans and guarantees, Shri Gupta underlined the need for self-discipline in fiscal
affairs.
The state Finance Secretaries welcomed the collective initiative of the centre,
states and the Reserve Bank of India on several important policy issues during the last
few years. They highlighted the need for fiscal adjustment, but felt that in view of the
existence of legacy problems, a consolidated approach was likely to be the most
effective. The Finance Secretaries reaffirmed their commitment to fiscal discipline
and concurred on the desirability of enacting fiscal responsibility legislation as had
already been done by some states. Monitoring of any emerging contingent liabilities
was receiving high priority so that appropriate action could be taken in a timely
fashion.
Chairing the meeting, Deputy Governor, Dr. Rakesh Mohan emphasised the
importance of improving the tax collection machinery to raise the tax/GDP ratio.
While acknowledging the necessity of expenditure containment, he stressed the equal
importance of raising tax revenues to reduce the revenue and fiscal deficits. The
conference deliberated on issues related to defaults in servicing of guaranteed bonds
and their impact on state finances, experience of market borrowings by state
governments since February 2003, restructuring and disinvestment of state enterprise,
uniform approach and use of technology for collection of value added tax, modalities
of issuing power bonds towards one-time settlement of the dues of state electricity
boards and pension liabilities of state Governments.  Special presentations were made
at the conference on issues related to infrastructure financing.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/157
2