“India’s Reserve Management policies are comparable to global best practices” - IMF
May 29, 2003
India’s management of foreign exchange reserves has generally been in accordance with
IMF guidelines and is comparable to the global best practices in this area. In line with global
developments, in the recent period, India’s reserve management operations have become more
transparent. The emphasis is on efficient management of reserves. In areas like greater and more
efficient use of information technology, use of sophisticated risk management techniques like
Value at Risk (VaR), determination of optimal currency composition, sound management of
credit and market risks and the internal governance structure, India’s policies are comparable
with international best practices.
These were the major findings recorded in an Accompanying Document recently
published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The Document has been published as a
supplement to the IMF’s “Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Reserve Management”. The
Guidelines were developed earlier by the Fund and were approved by its Executive Board in
September, 2001. The work on the Accompanying Document was initiated at the instance of the
Executive Directors of the Fund as a part of the broader programme to strengthen the
international financial architecture, promote policies and practices that contribute to the stability
and transparency in the financial sector and reduce external vulnerabilities of member countries.
The Guidelines identify areas of broad agreement among practitioners on reserve management
principles and practices that are applicable to a broader range of countries at different stages of
development and with various institutional structures for reserve management.
The Document has been developed based on the inputs, given by the reserve
management entities in 20 select countries, in the form of case studies. These countries have
been chosen in such a way as to represent countries at different stages of economic and financial
markets development and with different institutional structures to illustrate the ways and means
by which they have developed capacities in the area of foreign exchange reserve management.
India was one of the countries selected for the study. Besides India, the other select countries
include Australia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, The Czech Republic, Hong
Kong, Hungary, Israel, Republic of Korea, Latvia, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Tunisia, Turkey and the United Kingdom.
Observations regarding India’s
Foreign Exchange Reserves Management
Commenting on India’s reserve management objective, the Document observes that
“maintaining a capacity to intervene in the markets to support the exchange rate regime or to
contain excessive volatility in the foreign exchange market”, as also, “to provide confidence to
the markets and reduce their vulnerability to financial crises” have been some of its important
objectives. The Document further observes that “India intervenes in the market to even out
lumpy demand or supply in thin markets and to prevent destabilising speculation while
facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates for all permissible purposes. Liquidity
is, therefore, an important consideration in reserve management”.
In the context of accountability, the Document observes, “In India, external audit is
conducted by independent external auditing firms”. The Document has also noted, “In addition
to annual inspection by the internal inspection department and external statutory audit, there isconcurrent audit of the reserve management operations. There is also a system of appointing, on
an annual basis, an external auditor to conduct special audit of the dealing room transactions”.
On internal governance the Document states, “Strategic decisions on currency composition and
asset allocation are taken by the central bank in consultation with the government”.
As regards currency risk and currency composition of reserves, in the context of
management of reserves, the Document observes, “India considers the need to maintain a large
portion of reserves in the intervention currency, external trade profile and potential strengths and
weaknesses of the four major currencies for diversification benefits”. Further it states, “although
India has not divided the reserves portfolio into tranches, each currency benchmark portfolio is
divided into two components, one has a short duration and the other a longer duration”.
“India gives a small portion of the portfolio to external asset managers to have access to
and derive benefits from the information system and market research of a widely diversified
group of external asset managers. The relationship is also used to train portfolio managers”, the
Document observes. Regarding stress tests, the Document states that India has been undertaking
exercises based on stochastic models in order to estimate Liquidity at Risk.
General Findings of the Study
The country practices, according to these case studies, indicate that countries hold
reserves to support a range of objectives, the most common being the use of reserves as a tool
for exchange rate management or monetary policy in addition to the reduction of external
vulnerability. In almost all the cases, maintaining a capacity to intervene in the market continues
to be an important objective even though countries with floating rate arrangements do not need
to intervene in the markets regularly; for these countries, the objectives of holding reserves,
according the Document, are for crisis prevention, for providing confidence to the markets and
act as a buffer to manage exchange rate volatility.
The Document observes that the dominant objective of reserve management policy has
been “maintaining capacity to intervene in the foreign exchange markets, to support the
exchange rate regime or to contain excessive volatility in the foreign exchange markets” in
countries, such as, Brazil, India, Republic of Korea, Latvia, Oman, Tunisia and Turkey; while
countries like Colombia, the Czech Republic, India, Israel, Republic of Korea and Turkey hold
reserves to provide confidence to markets and reduce their vulnerability to financial crises.
While all the countries surveyed have reserves management policies that ensure
availability of adequate liquidity at acceptable cost, the emphasis has been increasingly on the
efficient management of the reserves in order to enhance the returns (or to reduce the costs),
while preserving the capital and ensuring liquidity. On the other hand, it emerges from the case
studies that over the last few years, there has been a trend towards greater transparency in
disclosing information on reserves and reserve management policy and performance.
Another observation made by the Document is that although India and Israel have not
divided the reserves portfolio into liquidity and investment tranches, each currency benchmark
portfolio is divided into two components in terms of short and long duration portfolios.
Developments in the area of information technology have been quoted as a major
challenge for all reserve management entities and the level of sophistication with which risk
management function has been attended to in the recent years has advanced significantly. Fromthe Document it emerges that some of the reserve management entities outsource the services of
external asset managers for managing reserves.
Full text of the Document is available on IMF Website
http://www.imf.org/external/np/mae/ferm/2003/eng/index.htm
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1215