RBI’s views on movements in Forward Premia
April 29, 2003
The recent decline in the forward premia has attracted the market participants  and there
has been a debate on the factors responsible for such a steep fall. This issue has attracted the
Reserve Bank India’s attention.  The issue has been dealt with in the recent statement on
monetary and credit policy in sufficient detail (paragraphs No.38 to 41).
Extracts :
A related issue that has been raised recently in the media and through expert comments
by market participants relates to the movement of forward market premia. The premia have
shown considerable downward movement in recent weeks. Thus, as of April 25, 2003, the 6-
month forward premia on US dollar was only 2.1 per cent (annualised  rate) as compared with
5.9 per cent a year ago and  3.4 per cent  at the beginning of January 2003. The sharp downward
movement in forward premia has occurred because, at present, there seems to be a rush to sell
dollars in the forward market by exporters and other entities in anticipation of further
appreciation of the rupee vis-à-vis US dollar. In response to this expectation, there is also a rush
to “borrow” dollars (for repayments later) and convert these into rupees now. If the rupee does
appreciate, the borrowers of dollars expect to make a financial gain (as fewer rupees would be
required to repay the “borrowed” dollars). This phenomenon is also reflected in banks going
“short” on dollars during intra-day and inter-day foreign currency trades. (paragraph 38)
While the demand for “borrowing” dollars for repayments later is strong, for the same
reason, the demand by corporates and others for “purchasing” dollars in exchange for rupees in
the spot and forward markets has become weaker.  This has resulted in corporates and other
market participants having larger “unhedged” exposures on their future dollar obligations.  It has
also led to some postponement of forward demand for dollars.  These two phenomena,  i.e.
higher incentive to sell or “borrow” dollars and lower demand for actual purchase of spot or
forward dollars have, inter alia, in combination put pressure on the forward premia. (paragraph
39)
The Reserve Bank has received various suggestions from banks and other market
participants to meet the demand for “borrowed” dollars, arising from expectations of continued
rupee appreciation.  It has been suggested that banks should be permitted a higher level of
foreign borrowings (over and above the present limit of 25 per cent of unimpaired Tier I capital),
and/or higher inflows of foreign currency deposits should be encouraged (by increasing, for
example, the ceiling interest rate on FCNR deposits which is, at present, 0.25 percentage point
below LIBOR). (paragraph 40)
While RBI will continue to operate in the spot and forward markets as per its foreign
exchange management policies, RBI is not in favour of increasing the unhedged borrowings by
corporates, and short term forex liabilities of banks in order to meet the demand for “borrowed”
dollars that is arising from expectations regarding future movements in dollar-rupee exchange
rate. To put at rest market speculations about RBI’s stance in this regard, it is clarified that:
1? At present, there is in fact an excess supply of US dollars in both the spot and forward
markets to meet all genuine transactions and investment demand by corporates, banks
and others. There is no shortage of foreign currency availability in the market.
? One-way expectations of exchange rate or premia may not always be fulfilled. Present
unhedged exposures seem to be on account of expectations on unconstrained appreciation
of rupee. Movements in respect of exchange rates may not, however, be unidirectional.
This can be seen from the movement of the Euro against the US dollar from 0.9606 to
1.1087 between September 17, 2002 and March 11, 2003, from 1.1087 to 1.0501 between
March 11 and March 21, 2003 and     from 1.0501 to 1.0997 between March 21 and April
25, 2003. Similar movements have also been observed in the case of pound sterling/US
dollar rate.
? For these reasons, it is of utmost importance, particularly in relatively thin developing
country markets, that foreign currency exposures by corporates and others are largely
hedged or covered against anticipated foreign currency earnings. It may be recalled that a
part of the problem that many emerging economies have faced in the past has been due to
excessive unhedged foreign currency exposures in a country during periods when
movement in exchange rate was absent (due to fixed exchange rate policy) or currency
was appreciating. (paragraph 41)
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1108
2