Exchange Rate Management: An Emerging Consensus?
August 14, 2003
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India delivered a major speech on 'Exchange
th
Rate Management: An Emerging Consensus?' today. He was speaking at the 14 National
Assembly of Forex Association of India in Mumbai. He was addressing the Assembly after a gap
of nearly 2-1/2 years. In his speech, the Governor covered areas of current interest to forex
specialists. The issues covered included the appropriate exchange rate regime, capital account
convertibility in India, adequacy and cost of foreign exchange reserves and the correct policy
stance in the management of exchange rate in India in the present environment. The major
highlights of the Governor's speech are presented below and the full text is enclosed.
International Consensus
The Governor reviewed the debate on the appropriate exchange rate regime and recalled
that initially after the Asian crisis, the widely accepted theoretical position was that a country had
the choice of either giving up monetary independence and setting up a currency board or giving
up the stable currency objective and letting the exchange rate float freely so that monetary policy
could then be directed to the objectives of inflation control. The possibility of having a viable
fixed rate mechanism, however, was discarded and the dominant view now is that, for most
countries floating or flexible rates are the only sustainable way of having a less crisis-prone
exchange rate regime. The Governor also pointed out that most of the countries have adopted
intermediate regimes of various types, such as, managed floats with no pre-announced path and
independent floats with foreign exchange intervention moderating the rate of change and
preventing undue fluctuations. By and large, barring a few, countries have “managed” floats and
central banks intervene periodically. (paragraphs 5 and 6 of the full text)
He summed up the review stating that some generally accepted views around which the
debate has now converged are:
(a) exchange rates should be flexible and not fixed or pegged;
(b) countries should be able to intervene or manage exchange rates – to at least some
degree – if movements are believed to be destablising in the short run; and
(c) reserves should be adequate to take care of fluctuations in capital flows and “liquidity
at risk”.
CAC in India:When?
Referring to capital account convertibility in India, the Governor pointed out that the
rupee is, for all practical purposes, convertible for most transactions which are required for
business or personal convenience. It is also the declared policy of the Government and the RBI
to continue with this process of liberalisation. He, however, cautioned against unlimited access to
short-term external commercial borrowing for meeting working capital and other domestic
requirements and against providing unrestricted freedom to domestic residents to convert their
domestic bank deposits and idle assets in response to market developments or exchange rate
expectations.Elaborating this, he stated that the issues in allowing free convertibility of domestic assets
by residents were more fundamental and had to do with the differential impact of “stock” and
“flows” in determining external vulnerability. The day-to-day movement in exchange rates is
determined by flows of funds, i.e., by demand and supply of spot or forward transactions in the
market.  No emerging market exchange rate system can, however, cope with a contingency that
could arise if domestic residents decided within a very short period to convert a significant part
of their domestic deposits into sterling, euro or dollar.  Such a contingency could be a reality in
India at a time when its domestic stock of bank deposits in rupees is nearly three and a half times
its total reserves, the Governor cautioned. (paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the full text)
Reserves at what cost?
Referring to the debate relating to foreign exchange reserves, the Governor pointed out
that India’s foreign exchange reserves are now among one of the largest in the world. The fact
that India’s balance of payments are showing positive trends – on the current as well as capital
accounts – is a reflection of the increasing competitiveness of the Indian economy and strong
confidence of the international community in India’s growth potential, he pointed out. He added
that for the first time after Independence 56 years ago, the fragility of the balance of payments is
no longer a concern of policy makers. This, according to the Governor, is a highly positive
development.
The Governor also referred to the concerns on “cost” of additional reserves and the
impact of “arbitrage”. He stated that the bulk of additions to reserves in the recent period is on
account of non-debt creating inflows, including NRI (Non-Resident Indian) deposits. The cost to
the country of non-debt creating inflows flows, the Governor stated, is exactly the same whether
they are added to reserves or are matched by equivalent foreign currency outflow on account of
higher imports or investments abroad by residents. Under present conditions, it seems that the
“cost” of additional reserves is really a non-issue from a broader macro-economic point of view.
He also said that “arbitrage” per se is unlikely to have been a primary factor in influencing
remittances or investment decisions by NRIs or foreign entities in the recent period. There is
very little incentive to send capital to India merely to take advantage of the interest differential.
Rather, within a certain low range, capital flows are likely to be more influenced by outlook for
growth and inflation than pure arbitrage even among industrial countries with full capital account
convertibility, he argued.  (paragraphs 20-21 of the full text)
Use of Reserves
The Governor agreed with the point raised by experts that it is paradoxical for a
developing country to have a current and capital account surplus and thereby add to its reserves,
rather than use foreign savings to enhance the rate of investment in the economy. It is for this
reason that the RBI in the recent period has been following a soft interest rate policy in an
environment of low inflation, he pointed out.  He, however, emphasised that there is very little
that the RBI can directly do to use the additional reserves for investment and stated that the
equivalent rupee resources have already been released by the RBI to the recipients of foreign
exchange and the decision on whether to invest, consume or deposit these additional rupee
resources lies with recipients. (paragraph 23 of the full text)
2India's Approach to Exchange Rate Management
The Governor referred to the three alternative approaches to the exchange rate
management in India suggested recently. One view was to allow the rupee to appreciate freely in
line with market trends; while the other suggested exactly the opposite view stating that the RBI
should intervene more aggressively in the market to further reduce the degree of appreciation;
and the third view stated that the RBI should pursue a policy of “calculated volatility”.
Welcoming the debate on the approach to exchange rate management, the Governor stated that
while there was validity in the alternative approaches put forward by experts, it is not at all clear
how they can be put into practice without causing substantial instability or uncertainty and
possible emergence of macro-economic problems which are worse than what they are trying to
solve. Stating that it would be nice if an alternative viable exchange rate management system
could be put in place which would avoid excessive build-up of reserves and domestic liquidity
and at the same time, maintain India’s external competitiveness with low inflation and low
interest rates, especially in view of the behavioural and market complexities in this area and
multiple economic policy objectives.  He pointed out that the results of the exchange rate policy
followed by the RBI since the Asian crisis in particular has been highly positive so far.
In addition to sharp increase in reserves and generally “orderly” movements in exchange
rates with low volatility, the confidence level of domestic and foreign investors in the Indian
external sector policies is strong.  The policies have also been acknowledged as “comparable to
the global best practices” and “ideal for Asia”  by international commentators. (paragraph 25 of
the full text)
In conclusion, the Governor stated that the long-run competitiveness of an economy
needs to be measured in relation to a multiple currency basket and in relation to major trading
partners over a reasonably long period of time. He also advised the participants that all entities
with foreign exchange exposures to resort to “hedging” with appropriate risk management of
assets and liabilities.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/214
3