Standing Technical Advisory Committee on Financial Regulation
November 20,2003
The Reserve Bank of India has today appointed a standing Advisory Committee on
Financial Regulation.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
2003-04 announced on November 3, 2003 it was indicated that in order to strengthen the
consultative process among banks, market participants and regulators of financial markets, a
Standing Technical Committee on Financial Regulation on similar lines as the RBI Technical
Advisory Committee on Money and Government Securities Market is being constituted to
advise Reserve Bank on a continuing basis. It was also indicated that the Committee would
examine the issues referred to it and advise Reserve Bank on regulations on an on-going basis
covering banks and non-bank financial institutions and other market participants, in addition
to the existing channels of consultations.
The constitution of the Committee is:
Chairperson
Smt. K.J.Udeshi
Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Members
1. Shri A.K. Purwar
Chairman
State Bank of India
Mumbai.
2. Shri S.S. Kohli
Chairman and Managing Director
Punjab National Bank
New Delhi.
3. Shri A.K.Batra
Member
Securities & Exchange Board of India
Mumbai
4. Shri M.Damodaran
Acting CMD
Industrial Development Bank of India
Mumbai
5. Dr. P.J. Nayak
Managing DirectorUTI Bank Ltd.
Mumbai.
6. Shri Niall S.K. Booker
CEO - India
HSBC
Mumbai.
7. Shri M.G. Bhide
Director
CRISIL
Mumbai.
8. Dr. N.L.Mitra
Vice Chancellor
National Law University
Jodhpur
9. Shri G.K. Raman
Director
Sundaram Finance Ltd.
Chennai.
10. Shri H.N. Sinor
CEO & Secretary
Indian Banks’ Association
Mumbai.
Secretaries
1. Shri C.R. Muralidharan
Chief General Manager
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai.
2. Shri A.K.Mishra
General Manager
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai.
Permanent Invitees
1. Shri Vepa Kamesam
 Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai.
2. Dr. Rakesh Mohan
Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of IndiaMumbai.
3. Smt. Shyamala Gopinath
Executive Director
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai.
The Committee may associate any other person as special invitee.
The terms of reference of the Committee are:
(a) to review current regulatory regime with a view to help RBI in simplifying and
rationalising it, in particular to move towards clearer as well as unambiguous regulatory
prescriptions and enhance internal control systems;
(b) to consider the existing regulatory practices on prudential norms and disclosure standards
for banks and non banks regulated by RBI and recommend measures for progressive
alignment with international best practices consistent with India's needs;
(c) to advise on the changes needed from time to time, in the regulatory framework in the
light of the emerging diversification of business mix of the financial services industry;
(d) to help analyse, as appropriate, harmonization of regulatory and prudential norms for the
various entities in the financial services sector in alignment with prescriptions of other
regulators;
(e) to explore appropriate regulatory responses to developments in the banking and financial
markets;
(f) to outline the steps to be taken by the RBI and banking entities in the context of Basel II
norms;
(g) to suggest measures for strengthening corporate governance in institutions regulated by
RBI; and
(h) to tender advice on any other specific issue relevant to the regulation of financial sector
either referred to it by the RBI or considered appropriate by the Committee.
The Committee will meet as often as may be necessary but ordinarily once in two months.
The Committee will initially function for two years from the date of its first meeting.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release:2003-2004/649