Report on Currency and Finance, 2001-02
March 31, 2003
"The findings, views, and conclusions expressed in this Report are
entirely those of the contributing staff of the Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy (DEAP) and should not necessarily be interpreted as
the official views of the Reserve Bank of India."
Introduction
Indian economic policy took a new direction in July 1991.  Over the decade or so since
then, the reform process has encompassed all areas of the economy.  These wide ranging reforms
were initiated and implemented in order to place the economy on a higher growth trajectory by
inducing greater efficiency and competitiveness in all spheres of economic activity.  It can
certainly be said that India is no longer an economy of scarcity and shortages: food stocks and
foreign exchange reserves are plentiful; shortages and rationing of essential goods and materials
are memories of the past.  In the macroeconomic and financial spheres, inflation has been
contained, external debt indicators have improved, exchange rate is flexible and the country is
free of financial repression.  The trade account is open and India has become much more
integrated with the world economy.  All this has been reflected in a relatively high rate of
economic growth over the decade and a significant reduction in poverty in the country.  The
economy has also become more resilient to shocks, both domestic and external; the twin-shock
of drought and increasing oil prices in this past year have been absorbed with relative ease.
With data now available for the full decade after economic reforms began in 1991, the
time is opportune to undertake a stock taking of the reform process and its outcomes.  The
Report on Currency and Finance, 2001-02 accordingly makes an effort in this direction. In
addressing this theme, the Report focusses on the key reform measures undertaken in various
sectors in the 1990s, their rationale, content, impact and emerging lessons for the future.
The Report is structured in the following manner. The theme of the Report is introduced
in Chapter-I, followed by a review of the recent macroeconomic developments in the Indian
economy during 2002-03 so far in Chapter-II. The next five chapters of the Report pertain to the
review of the reform process, with issues related to the real economy, fiscal policy, money, credit
and prices, financial sector and external sector being addressed in turn in successive chapters.
The final chapter, drawing on the finding of the earlier chapters, makes an overall assessment of
the reform process and draws lessons from the experience so far.
Recent Economic Developments
The Indian economy had to contend with a series of challenges – domestic and external -
during 2002-03.  Agricultural performance was affected by insufficient monsoons after thirteen
years. At the same time, the prospects of a global economic recovery are still not very clear,
especially in the context of the on-going military action in the Middle East. Viewed in the
context of these uncertainties, the advance estimate of a real GDP growth rate of 4.4 per cent
1puts the Indian economy ahead of global economic activity and demonstrates its resilience to
shocks.
A major positive development has been the indication of revival of industrial growth. A
number of favourable factors now create a macroeconomic environment conducive for
investment. First, monetary conditions remain stable and easy, notwithstanding a higher non-
food credit off-take and the large order of the Government's borrowing programme. Second,
inflation continues to be within tolerable limits, despite the drought and higher fuel prices.
Finally, foreign exchange reserves continue to be comfortable following the pick-up in export
demand and continuing capital flows.
The Real Economy
The findings of Chapter-III suggest that weakening investment demand associated with a
stagnating domestic saving rate, along with the cyclical influences of the global business cycle,
have led to the relative economic slowdown of recent years. Private sector savings, however,
particularly household savings, have continued to grow. A major challenge to growth in future is
the reversal of public sector dissaving to achieve the level of savings recorded in this sector in
the late 1980s. A substantial strengthening would have to come from an increase in the tax- GDP
ratio and large-scale improvement in the operation of public enterprises by rationalisation of user
charges. Another concern for achieving higher growth emanates from indications of decelerating
productivity growth, which reinforces the need for accelerating the pace of structural reforms.
The recent predicament of mounting food stocks occurred despite deceleration in
agricultural growth in the 1990s. The level of food stocks much above the prescribed norms can
be attributed to domestic price distortions, shifts in consumption pattern away from cereals to
non-traditional food items, and reduced price competitiveness on account of a relatively rapid
decline in international prices in the late 1990s. A higher growth in agriculture thus needs much
faster crop diversification. With the share of un-processed food falling in total food consumption,
the future growth in agriculture lies in high value added segments such as horticulture, dairying,
pisciculture, poultry and floriculture, which also have higher export potential. Policies and
programmes that need to be designed to support higher productivity and production in these
areas should be reasonably disaggregated and knowledge intensive. Further, strong Government
programmes supported by a decentralised private sector framework will be needed to invest in
appropriate facilities. Supportive financing is needed for development of rural infrastructure such
as rural roads, cold storage and transport facilities.  Furthermore, rationalisation of input prices
particularly fertilisers, electricity and irrigation is required to reduce subsidies and to release
resources for infrastructure maintenance and build-up.
The slow pace of industrial restructuring and the resultant loss of competitiveness in a
liberalised trade environment have led to the current protracted manufacturing slowdown.
Investment in infrastructure as a whole has shown a clear decline of one percentage point of
GDP between the first and the second halves of the 1990s. This decline can be attributed to
declining Government investment on infrastructure caused by deterioration in Government
capital expenditure. This has had a clear impact on the availability, quality and cost of
infrastructure services. During the latter phase of reforms, the cost of power for industry has
2risen at a rate much faster than the rise in the prices of manufacturing products. Thus, the high
cost of infrastructure, particularly power and railways freight, together with the prevailing high
real interest rates, have adversely impacted the price competitiveness of the industrial sector and
contributed to the persisting industrial slowdown. The challenges posed by increasing
competition, thus, require adequate flexibility in industrial restructuring involving more rapid
bankruptcy procedures, easier allocation of capital, faster transformation of urban land use and
flexibility in labour use. Furthermore, the dereservation of SSI products is required to expand
investment and bring new technology in order to enable them to operate at an economically
efficient scale. Price competitiveness also requires that competitive prices of basic infrastructure
inputs be charged from industry through the rationalisation of user charges between different
consumer categories.
Fiscal Policy
An assessment of the fiscal reforms initiated in the beginning of the 1990s reveals that
the process of fiscal consolidation could not be sustained beyond the mid-1990s. This was
because fiscal consolidation during the first half of the1990s was brought about primarily
through cuts in investment expenditure while the rise in revenue expenditure could not be
curtailed. The reduction in investment expenditure affected future growth prospects with a
consequent slowdown in revenue receipts, while interest payments and public debt continued to
grow. Besides, low user charges, inadequate returns on Government investments and
continuation of a tax system characterised by a plethora of concessions and exemptions, were the
other prominent factors explaining deterioration of government finances.
In case of State Governments, an uneconomical level of user charges particularly in the
power sector, sluggishness of Central transfers due to decline in tax buoyancies and growing
interest payments were the key factors causing fiscal deterioration.
Progress towards better fiscal-monetary coordination during the reform period was an
important achievement. Elimination of automatic monetisation together with reduction in pre-
emption of institutional resources by the Government has provided a conducive environment to
generate market liquidity and softening of interest rates in the economy. However, the fall in
interest rates could not stem the sharp increase in interest payments both at the Central and State
Government levels. This essentially reflects the sizeable outstanding liabilities contracted at
higher interest rates during the early 1990s and return to rising fiscal deficit.
Introduction of institutional support in the form of fiscal rules could be a prime mover of
future agenda of fiscal consolidation programme. Such fiscal rules, which make a clear
distinction between public consumption and public investment expenditure, could facilitate the
path for durable fiscal consolidation through mandatory fiscal discipline.
Money, Credit and Prices
Monetary policy reforms in the 1990s were enabled by fundamental shifts in the
monetary-fiscal interface. Moreover, in the context of the growing openness of the Indian
economy, the absorption of excess foreign exchange supply in the market led to significant
3compositional shifts in the Reserve Bank balance sheet and the reserve money analytics. The
growing integration of various markets and increasing globalisation called for reforms in the
monetary policy operating framework in terms of instruments, procedure and institutional
architecture.
Monetary policy reforms facilitated a significant reduction in pre-emption of resources. A
noteworthy development was the lowering of inflation in the economy in the second half of the
1990s attributable, inter alia, to better monetary management. This, in turn, led to a concomitant
softer interest rate environment, especially in the government securities market. The Liquidity
Adjustment Facility(LAF) was able to maintain stability in money market conditions. Finally,
monetary policy was successful in effective sterilisation of capital flows in consonance with
domestic requirements. An empirical assessment of the monetary transmission mechanism
suggests that the output and inflation shocks are largely on account of non-monetary factors and
the contribution of the monetary policy shocks has further declined during the 1990s as
compared with the 1980s.
A few issues emerge from the analysis. An important factor determining the effectiveness
of the monetary transmission process is the degree of 'pass-through'. In view of the weak
sensitivity of the bank lending rates to changes in the Bank Rate, the efficacy of the monetary
policy in reinvigorating growth runs up against a constraint. Second, the shrinking of net
domestic assets of the Reserve Bank in the context of sustained capital flows brings into focus
the limits of sterilisation on an ongoing basis. Finally, a key objective of macroeconomic policy,
including monetary policy, must be the avoidance of resurgence of inflationary expectations. In
this context, fiscal dominance continues to persist with growing volume of gross market
borrowings. The burden of directly financing the fiscal deficit could possibly revert back to the
Reserve Bank in case of a reversal in the liquidity conditions, especially as banks' investments in
government securities are already far in excess of their statutory liquidity requirements(SLR).
Therefore, the issue of separation of debt management functions from the monetary authority
needs to be addressed. The proposed Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management legislation
and the need to accord greater operational flexibility to the Reserve Bank as indicated in the
Finance Minister's Budget speech in February 2000 could have far-reaching ramifications on the
operational framework of monetary policy in India in a desirable direction.
Financial Sector
The main thrust of reforms in the financial sector was to evolve an open, vibrant, efficient
and stable financial system that would play an active role not only in the resource allocation of
the economy but also in turn be crucial to the growth process of the economy.  As a response to
the reform process, the commercial banking sector witnessed a substantial improvement in
stability and efficiency parameters. The same, however, cannot be maintained about other
intermediaries such as, co-operative banks, non-banking finance companies(NBFCs) and
development finance institutions(DFIs), which showed a declining trend in the recent years due
to sector specific factors.
While the insurance sector, which has opened to private players only recently, is picking
up, the growth of mutual funds has remained relatively stagnant in recent years.  On the other
4hand, the reforms have helped in improving the depth, liquidity and efficiency of various
segments of the financial system like the money market, Government securities market, foreign
exchange market and capital market. One of the major outcomes of the reform process has been
the growing integration among various segments of the financial markets. The distinctions
between banks and other financial intermediaries are getting increasingly blurred.
While increased inter-linkages are expected to lead to increased efficiency in the resource
allocation process and the effectiveness of monetary policy, they also increase the risk of
contagion from one segment to another with implications for overall financial stability. This
would call for appropriate policy responses during the times of crisis. Increased inter-linkages
also raise the issue of appropriate supervisory framework. The financial sector reforms have
thus, supported the transition of the Indian economy to a higher growth path while significantly
improving the stability of the financial system. The challenge henceforth lies in translating these
gains to develop a more mature financial system, which could sustain India on a higher growth
trajectory.
External Sector
The external sector reforms initiated in the wake of the balance of payments crisis of
1991 were all encompassing. Although the reforms were largely crisis led, the policy initiatives
were unique in terms of their gradual, cautious and country-specific approach. India’s balance of
payments position strengthened over the 1990s even though the period coincided with the
liberalisation of external account, external currency crisis and domestic political uncertainties.
Resilience of the external sector has helped India successfully avert the contagion effects of the
East Asian crisis.
Although India’s tariffs have gradually declined through the 1990s, the tariff levels
continue to be high as compared with the East Asian economies. An accelerated pace of
reduction of tariffs and removal of constraints on the small-scale industries would be conducive
to industrial growth and exports. There has also been a discernible shift in India’s export strategy
with overall diversification of exports across commodities and markets.
A sustained surge in capital flows in the recent past has implications for monetary and
inflation management although, the Reserve Bank has so far been able to sterilise the monetary
impact of foreign exchange reserves through large open market sales of government securities.
The reserve management policy, coupled with the exchange rate management and monetary
policy pursued by the Reserve Bank, created an atmosphere of softer interest rate regime, which
is conducive to higher economic growth. In addition, the recent policy initiatives have created an
investment atmosphere where foreign investment supplements domestic investment, which in a
medium-term perspective would ensure a higher growth trajectory.
Assessment of Reforms
India’s experience with reforms has reflected the pursuit of an open-ended, eclectic and
pragmatic approach on questions of economic policy. The issue of the supremacy of markets
over the Government and of the private sector over the public sector is now in the realm of
5ideology without practical relevance. The practical issue is about harnessing the productive
resources available in both sectors and on the basis of identification of the dynamic comparative
advantage that the public and the private sectors have in the various sectors of the economy,
pursue a policy of entry and exit and economic restructuring. There is also the practical issue of
development of instruments and markets and setting up the legal and institutional system by the
State which is a necessary pre-condition for successful transition to a market oriented economy.
In this regard, the State has to establish the regulatory framework that minimises the regulatory
burden on the market players and hindrance to the free-play of market forces, for the ultimate
objectives of growth and development with financial stability. The historical lesson is that most
of the successful cases of development are those which have managed to combine the virtues of
conflicting paradigms rather than relying exclusively on a single-set of pre-ordained theoretically
right policies. The challenge today is to take the reforms further by addressing the remaining
agenda. The Report mentions various gaps, which the policy reforms would need to focus more
sharply, specially in the areas of real sector and fiscal policy.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1015
6