Trading of Government Securities on the Stock Exchanges
January 16, 2003
Government bonds are securities issued by the Central and State Governments. RBI
as the banker to the Governments regularly services the payment of interest and the principal
on these securities. Being sovereign paper these securities are most safe. The other major
advantages of government securities are that they are tradeable and can be used as collateral
for loans.  There is no tax deduction at Source (TDS) on interest payments on Government
securities and for individuals, interest income upto Rs. 3000 per annum is exempt from
Income Tax. The securities can be bought or sold at the market price and to the extent the
prices go up or down there is a gain/loss in investing in these securities.
          The participants in the government securities markets at present are usually banks,
insurance companies, provident funds (PFs), trusts, non-banking finance companies (NFCs),
mutual funds, etc. As the purchase and sale of government securities requires access to the
wholesale market, this market was hitherto practically out of reach of the individual
investors.  Even for mid-segment investors such as trusts, NBFCs, PFs, etc. located at far
flung places there has been no easy access for investing in this market, thus, making them
vulnerable to unscrupulous intermediaries.  Moreover, the prices available to such investors
are very often at wide variation from the wholesale market prices.
In order to facilitate easier access and wider participation in the government securities
markets a facility is being provided to buy and sell government securities through the stock
exchanges.  The system proposed is similar to the one available for buying and selling of
shares. The reach of the stock exchange screens will ensure that government securities can be
bought or sold throughout the country.  The Scheme is expected to improve the efficiency of
Government securities market as well as its transparency, depth and liquidity.  Keeping in
view the interests of the small investor, the minimum order size has been kept low at Rs.1000
(face value), i.e., 10 units of face value Rs. 100 each. Further, the anonymous form of trading
will ensure that the smaller participants are not discriminated against.
The main benefits of the proposed scheme are
q Investors, such as, individuals, provident funds, trusts, corporates, who find it
difficult to obtain competitive and transparent prices while buying and selling
government securities will now be able to do so.
q Settlement risk is minimal for the investors as delivery of securities is
contingent upon receipt of payment and vice versa. The settlement guarantee
funds of the exchanges will provide further comfort for minimizing any
residual settlement risk.
q Individual investors can buy and sell government securities with ease.
q There will be transparency and efficiency in price discovery through the
anonymous screen based order matching system for trading.2
This facility will be in addition to the present systems of dealing in government
securities. To begin with, all outstanding and newly issued Government of India dated
securities would be traded on the eligible stock exchanges with effect from January 16, 2003.
Other eligible securities like State government bonds and Treasury Bills would be added in
phases.  Government securities will be deemed to be listed at the time of issue.
The members of the eligible exchanges having minimum net worth as specified by
SEBI shall be eligible to trade in the government securities on the stock exchanges.  SEBI has
permitted National Stock Exchange (NSE), Mumbai Stock Exchange (BSE) and Over the
Counter Exchange of India (OTCEI) as eligible exchanges to provide such trading platform.
Like equities, the government securities would be traded on the permitted exchanges on a T +
3 rolling settlement basis.
Institutional investors are expected to play an active role in providing liquidity to the
government securities market and promote retailing under the proposed Scheme.  Banks,
Primary Dealers, Insurance Companies, Mutual Funds, etc. are being enabled by the
respective regulatory authorities to hold government securities with the depositories and
transact on the stock exchanges.  With a view to facilitating their participation on the Stock
Exchanges, the following facilities are also being extended to them:
1) Value free transfer of securities between their SGL/CSGL accounts with RBI and their
demat accounts with the depositories
2) Reckoning the securities held in the demat accounts with Depository Participants (DPs)
also for SLR purposes.
3) Exempting institutional investors from margin requirements as in the case of equities.
From 16th January 2003 onwards any individual in India can buy/sell government
bond in the same manner as buying/selling of shares.  This would require three steps - (i) the
individual would require a demat account with any DP, (ii) he/she would have to place a buy
order for the bonds required with a stock broker, and (iii) three working days later, the bonds
would be transferred into the individual's demat account.
As a demonstration of the new market, the Finance Minister used it to buy
Government of India bond of Rs. 1000 while inaugurating the system.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/749