Revised Scheme of Ways and Means Advances to
State Governments from March 3, 2003
 
March 4, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India has revised the Scheme of Ways and Means Advances for
the State Governments. The revised scheme will be operationalised from March 3, 2003 to
give benefit of the higher limits for the Ways and Means Advances from the Reserve Bank of
India to the States in the last month of the current fiscal year.
The revised WMA and Overdraft Regulation Schemes, effective from March 3, 2003
will be:
 
WMA Scheme 2003
 
Normal WMA limits
 
The revised normal WMA limits, effective from March 3, 2003, have been computed
by taking into account the average of revenue receipts for the three fiscal years 1999-2000,
2000-2001 and 2001-2002 and then applying to this average, a multiplication factor of 3.19
per cent for the non-special category States and 3.84 per cent for the special category States
respectively.
As per the revised formula, the total normal WMA limits effective from March 3,
2003 will work out to Rs.7,170 crore as against the present limit of Rs.6,035 crore,
representing an increase of Rs.1,135 crore or about 18.8 per cent.
The rate of interest charged on normal WMA will be (a) Bank Rate (currently 6.25
per cent) for the period of 1 to 90 days and (b) one per cent above the Bank Rate for the
period beyond 90 days as against Bank Rate now.
The minimum normal WMA limit has been retained at Rs. 50 crore for any State.
Special WMA
 
The Special WMA Scheme has also been simplified and liberalised. The existing
Special WMA Scheme will continue to be linked to the investments made by State
Governments in the Government of India securities, i.e., dated securities and Treasury Bills.
A lower and uniform margin of five per cent will be applied now on the market value of the
securities for determining the operating limit of Special WMA. At present, margins varying
from 10 to 15 per cent are applied by Reserve Bank of India. The States will have to avail of
Special WMA limits first before seeking accommodation under the normal WMA limits.  The
rate of interest applicable to Special WMA will be one per cent below the Bank Rate as
against Bank Rate now.
 
Minimum Balance
 
The present scheme of maintaining minimum balance with the RBI will continue.
There is no change in the amount of minimum balance to be maintained by the State
Governments. 
Overdraft Regulation Scheme
 
The Overdraft Regulation Scheme is:
 
(i) The number of days that a State can be in overdraft has been extended to 14
consecutive working days from the present 12 consecutive working days. In
case the overdraft continues in the State's account beyond 14 consecutive
working days, the RBI and its agencies shall stop payments in respect of the
concerned State Government.
(ii) The existing norm of restricting overdraft to 100 per cent of the normal WMA
limit will continue. If the overdraft exceeds this limit for five consecutive
working days for the first time in a financial year, the Reserve Bank will
advise the State to bring down the overdraft level within the 100 per cent of
WMA limit. If, however, such irregularity occurs on a second or subsequent
occasion in the financial year, the Reserve Bank will stop payments
notwithstanding provision (i) above, which permits the State overdraft upto 14
days.
(iii) No State Government will be allowed to be in overdraft for more than 36
working days in a quarter. If this is not adhered to, payments will be stopped,
irrespective of clauses (i) and (ii) above. This regulation, however, will be
applicable from April 1, 2003.
(iv) The rate of interest on overdraft will be: (a) overdraft up to 100 per cent of
normal WMA limit - three per cent above the Bank Rate, and (b) overdraft
exceeding 100 per cent of the normal WMA limit - six per cent above the
Bank Rate. Under the present scheme, the rate of interest on overdraft is two
per cent above the Bank Rate.
 
Review of the Scheme
 
The Scheme will be reviewed in its totality on receipt of the recommendations of the
th
12 Finance Commission.
 
Background
Under Section 17(5) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Reserve Bank
provides Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to States. The facility is to help States tide over
temporary mismatches in cash flow of their receipts and payments.  There are two types of
WMA - normal and special.  While normal WMA are clean advances, special WMA are
secured advances provided against the pledge of Government of India securities.  At present,
the normal WMA for a State is computed on the basis of three-year average of revenue
receipts and capital expenditure as per the formula recommended by the Informal Advisory
Committee on WMA to State Governments (Vithal Committee - 1998). A Group of State
Finance Secretaries subsequently revised the formula in 2001.
The current limits for normal WMA which were last fixed with effect from April 1,
2002 amount to Rs.6,035 crore - Rs.5,385 crore for non-special category States and Rs.650
crore for special category States.
2The special WMA limits are computed on quarterly basis.
 
Any amount drawn by a State in excess of WMA is an overdraft.  As per the existing
Overdraft Regulations Scheme, no State is allowed to run an overdraft with the Reserve Bank
for more than 12 consecutive working days.  The Reserve Bank and its agencies stop
payments in respect of State Governments if (i) any State Government remains in overdraft
beyond 12 consecutive working days; or (ii) any State Government exceeds the 100 per cent
WMA limit in overdraft for more than five consecutive working days.
The current scheme has been revised in keeping with Ramachandran Committee’s
recommendations and consultations with the State governments.  The Governor, Reserve
Bank of India had, in October 2002, constituted an Advisory Committee to review the
existing system of normal WMA, special WMA and overdraft to the State Governments. Shri
C.Ramachandran, former Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance, Government of India
and former Executive Director, Asian Development Bank was the Chairman of the Advisory
Committee with Shri Suman Bery, Director-General, National Council for Applied Economic
Research (NCAER) as Member and Shri H.R. Khan, chief General Manager, Internal Debt
Management Cell (IDMC), RBI as the Member-Secretary.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/916
3