Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy, 2002-03
June 9, 2003
The Department of Economic Analysis and Policy of the Reserve Bank of
India has brought out the annual statistical publication titled ‘Handbook of Statistics on
the Indian Economy, 2002-03’, both in the print and CD-Rom versions. It contains
time series data on major macroeconomic and financial variables on the Indian
economy. This volume, which is the fifth in the series, contains 228 statistical tables
spanning nearly 5000 variables/data series on national income aggregates, output,
prices, money, banking, financial markets, public finances and trade and balance of
payments indicators. Data are compiled from both within the Reserve Bank of India
and from outside sources and made available to researchers, analysts and other users at
a single place. The Handbook is one of the several steps taken by the Reserve Bank for
improving transparency through data dissemination and has emerged, of late, as the
largest selling publication of the Reserve Bank.
The current volume contains ten new tables that provide time series data on
Minimum Support Prices for foodgrains and non- foodgrains, performances of small-
scale industries, position of sick and weak units, status of the central sector projects,
cost over-runs of central sector projects, resource mobilisation in the private placement
market, turn-over in the equity derivatives market, forward premia in exchange rates
and growth rates of area, production and yield of foodgrains and non- foodgrains. Data
series, where possible, have been updated till end-March 2003. For many annual
series, data are provided since 1950-51 in this volume though in general they continue
to be available from 1970-71.
The inland price of the print version is Rs.300 per copy (inclusive of postage)
with concessional price at Rs.250 for students, public libraries and educational
institutions. The same for overseas buyers is US$ 80 (inclusive of postage by airmail).
The inland price for the CD-Rom version is Rs.300 per copy (inclusive of postages)
with concessional price at Rs.200. The same for overseas buyers is US$ 60 (inclusive
of postage by airmail). For buyers interested in the print version along with the CD-
Rom, the inland price is Rs.500 (inclusive of postage) with concessional price at
Rs.400. The same for overseas buyers is US$ 130.  The publication is available for sale
in the Sales Section, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of
Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, Ground Floor, Amar Building,
P.M. Road, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001.
Order for the purchase can be placed with the Director, Division of Reports,
Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve
Bank of India, City Ice Building, 2nd floor, Perin Nariman Street, Fort, Mumbai 400
001 on payment through demand draft or cheque drawn in favour of the Reserve Bank
of India and payable at Mumbai only. The publication  is also available on the  RBI
website: http://www.rbi.org.in.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1259