Dr. Y.V. Reddy takes over as RBI Governor
September 6, 2003
Dr. Yaga Venugopal Reddy today took over as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of
India. As Governor, Dr. Reddy will have a five-year term. He will be the twenty-first
Governor of the Reserve Bank. Prior to his appointment as the Governor, Reserve Bank of
India, Dr. Reddy was India's Executive Director on the Board of the International Monetary
Fund.
An officer of the Indian Administrative Service 1964 batch, Dr. Reddy has spent most
of his career working in the areas of finance and planning both, at State and Central level. He
has held the positions of Secretary (Banking) in Ministry of Finance, Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Commerce, Joint Secretary in Ministry of Finance in Government of India and
Principal Secretary in Government of Andhra Pradesh. He was also Adviser in World Bank
and is on the International Monetary Fund’s panel of consultants in Fiscal Affairs. His
experience in development process includes advising China, Bahrain, Ethiopia and Tanzania.
Prior to his appointment as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Reddy has
served a six-year tenure with the Reserve Bank of India as its Deputy Governor. Appointed
on September 14, 1996 for a period of five years, his term as the Deputy Governor was
extended for two more years from September 2001.  On his appointment as India's Executive
Director to the International Monetary Fund, from August 2002, however, he resigned as the
Deputy Governor in July 2002. As Deputy Governor in the Reserve Bank, Dr. Reddy looked
after the monetary policy, exchange rate policy, internal and external debt management,
foreign exchange reserves management and economic research.
In the Government, Dr. Reddy has had vast experience in and has made contributions
to the areas of financial sector reforms; trade finance; monitoring of balance of payments and
exchange rate; external commercial borrowings; centre-state financial relations; regional
planning; and public enterprise reform. Dr. Reddy has been closely associated with
significant policy changes and institution building. He was Member-Secretary of two high
level committees - one on Balance of Payments and the other on Public Sector
Disinvestments. Dr. C. Rangarajan, former Governor, Reserve Bank of India headed both the
committees. Dr. Reddy was also a member of the Reserve Bank of India's Policy Group on
External Debt Statistics.
Dr. Reddy maintains a strong commitment to academic pursuits and has several
publications to his credit mainly in areas relating to finance, planning and public enterprises.
In pursuance of his academic interest, he was, for brief spells, Visiting Fellow, International
Relations Department, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, a full-
time UGC Visiting Professor in Department of Business Management, Osmania University;
full-time Visiting Faculty, Administrative Staff College of India and continues to be the
Honorary Senior Fellow at Centre for Economic and Social Studies at Hyderabad.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/327