India selected by IMF to provide Credit under
the Financial Transactions Plan (FTP)
June 28, 2003
In view of its strong balance of payments (BoP) and comfortable foreign exchange
reserves position, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has selected India to become a
member of its Financial Transaction Plan (FTP) from the quarter September-November,
2002. The IMF selects countries with strong BoP and foreign exchange reserves position for
contributing to the FTP. These countries help the IMF finance the balance of payments needs
of other countries.  Selection of India as member of the FTP, for the first time by IMF, sends
strong signals regarding the country’s strength and resilience of its external sector to the
international community.
India's subscription to FTP so far: SDR 205 million
The first transfer of SDR 5 million under India’s participation in FTP was effected on
May 07, 2003. The second transfer of SDR 200 million was effected on June 17, 2003. With
this development, India has now become a creditor to the IMF.
To effect these transfers of SDR 5 million and SDR 200 million to the IMF, the
Government of India bought equivalent foreign exchange (US $ 6.96 million and US $
284.21 million)) from the Reserve Bank of India on those dates from its foreign currency
reserves. Foreign assets held in the form of Reserve Tranche Position (RTP) are akin to other
components of foreign exchange reserves and are given a rate of return by the IMF. They can
also be used by India, when required, to deal with any balance of payments needs entirely at
India’s discretion.
Data on FTP and Foreign Exchange Reserves in Weekly Statistical Supplement (WSS)
To impart full transparency, the Reserve Tranche Position (RTP) of the Government
of India ( GoI) with the IMF was introduced as a memo item in the Table on Foreign
Exchange Reserves in the Weekly Statistical Supplement to the Reserve Bank of India
Bulletin, from the week ending May 23, 2003 (published on May 31, 2003). The Weekly
Statistical Supplement for the current week (released today), i.e., June 28, 2003, shows an
increase in India’s FTP by US $ 291.17 million. An equivalent amount has been drawn from
the Foreign Currency Assets (FCA), which is also reflected in the figures for the current
week.
Changes in Foreign Currency Assets
It may be mentioned that a change in the foreign currency assets (FCA) as shown in
the Weekly Supplement can occur on account of any of the following three reasons:
• Net purchases/receipts/sales of foreign currency assets by the Reserve Bank;
• Valuation changes because of changes in exchange rate of rupee with dollar or that of
dollar with other foreign currencies which form part of India’s foreign currency
assets; and• Changes in India’s contribution to IMF’s FTP.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release:2002-2003/1328