RBI releases Draft Guidelines for
 Exchange traded Interest Rate Derivatives
April 24, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India today allowed the entities regulated by it to transact in
interest rate derivatives on Indian exchanges in a phased manner. For this purpose it released
draft guidelines and invited comments from market participants.
With a view to enabling the RBI regulated entities namely, the Scheduled Commercial
Banks (SCBs) excluding Regional Rural Banks and Local Area Banks, Primary Dealers
(PDs) and specified All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs), to manage their exposure to
interest rate risks, the Reserve Bank has allowed them to transact in interest rate derivatives
on the Indian exchanges in a phased manner.
In the first phase, these entities can transact only in interest rate futures for hedging the
interest rate risk in their underlying government securities portfolio. Market making, as also,
access to wider range of products will be considered later on the basis of the experience
gained, the Reserve Bank has stated.
To enable these entities to transact in interest rate derivatives, the Reserve Bank is
concurrently permitting SCBs, PDs and AIFIs to seek membership of the Futures and Options
(F&O) segment of the stock exchanges for the limited purpose of undertaking proprietary
transactions for hedging interest rate risk. Those not seeking membership of stock exchanges
can transact through approved F & O members of the exchanges. As trading members of the
F&O segment, SCBs, PDs and AIFIs would have to settle their derivative trades directly with
the clearing corporation/clearing house. On the other hand, those participating through
approved F & O members would settle proprietary trades as participant clearing members.
The Reserve Bank has placed the draft guidelines in this regard on its website
(www.rbi.org.in) for quick comments from market participants. Response may please be
emailed to dealingroomidmc@rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1092