Finance Minister meets the Directors of the RBI Central Board
March 15, 2003
The customary post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India
with the Finance Minister was held at New Delhi today.  The meeting was also attended by Shri
Anandarao V. Adsul, Minister of State for Banking, Insurance and Expenditure, Dr. Ashok
Lahiri, Chief Economic Adviser, Shri C. S. Rao, Secretary, Revenue, Shri D. C. Gupta,
Secretary, Expenditure, Smt. Vinita Rai, Secretary, Banking and Shri D. Swarup, Additional
Secretary (Financial Sector). Besides Shri S. Narayan, Finance Secretary, other Directors of the
Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India present at the meeting included Shri Y. H. Malegam,
Chartered Accountant, Shri K. Madhava Rao, State Election Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh, Dr
Mihir Rakshit, Director, Monetary Research Project, ICRA, Shri K. P. Singh, Chairman, DLF
Group, Shri D. S. Brar, CEO and MD, Ranbaxy Laboratories, Shri N. R. Narayana Murthy,
Chairman & Chief Mentor, Infosys Technologies, Prof C. N. R. Rao, Honorary President,
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Dr A. S. Ganguly, Chairman, ICI
Ltd., Shri H. P. Ranina, Advocate, Supreme Court, Prof V. S. Vyas, Former Director, IIM,
Ahmedabad and Shri Suresh Krishna, Chairman, Sundaram Fasteners Ltd.
Welcoming the Honourable Finance Minister, Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of State Shri
Anandarao V. Adsul and Secretaries of the Ministry of Finance, Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India said that the five priorities highlighted in this year’s budget for
development of the country and alleviation of poverty were extremely important. He
congratulated the Finance Minister for having this long term vision reflected in the specific
budget proposals. The priorities accorded to administrative reforms and simplification of taxation
system were also appropriate. As pointed out in the budget speech and the Finance Minister’s
reply to the debate in the Parliament, fiscal deficit remained a difficult problem. The overall
macroeconomic conditions at present were, however, extremely favourable for acceleration in
growth in an environment of price stability, the Governor stated. While there was some adverse
effect on inflation because of drought and increase in oil prices, the average rate of inflation in
general continued to be satisfactory. The Governor further pointed out that unlike in the past,
despite the drought and increase in oil prices the external position was very strong with foreign
exchange reserve at the highest level and foreign exchange markets generally stable and orderly.
The Governor mentioned that the present external position of the economy was strong enough to
take care of any eventuality that may arise out of adverse international developments. Assuming
normal monsoon in 2003-04, circumstances were propitious for a substantial increase in growth
rate provided budget priorities were implemented by the government, he added.
In his address to the RBI Board, the Finance Minister outlined the underlying philosophy
of the budget which was based on giving greater stress to the country’s strengths. He had,
therefore, focused on sectors that were likely to provide quick returns for growth of the economy
and employment. These were infrastructure, textiles, tourism, pharmaceuticals and other
knowledge based industries and information technology.  In recognition of the existing fiscal
constraints, he had emphasized public private partnerships in infrastructure by leveraging public
funds of Rs.2000 crore for catalyzing much larger investments in infrastructure benefiting all
aspects of economic activity.The Finance Minister mentioned the rigidity in the expenditure structure where debt
service payments, essential defence expenditures and subsidies accounted for a large portion of
available resources.  He had consequently concentrated on giving attention to the reduction of
interest payments through the prepayment of external debt, restructuring of state debt and the
restructuring of some financial institutions.
Dwelling on the revenue side, he emphasized the measures proposed on simplification of
tax administration; tax revenues must be mobilised in a green channel system based on trust
rather than mistrust.  He had adopted 90 per cent of the Kelkar Task Force reports in the case of
tax administration, he pointed out.
He mentioned the necessity of stimulating agriculture through greater technology
investment in that sector and called for another technology revolution in agriculture.
He concluded by saying that with the budget having been introduced, his priority now is
the implementation of his budget proposals.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/962