Government of India Announces Issue of Floating Rate Bonds, 2011
August 1, 2003
The Government of India have announced sale of "Floating Rate Bonds, 2011" for an
aggregate amount of Rs 6,000 crore (nominal) by auction.
Up to 5 per cent of the notified amount of the sale of the bonds will be allotted to
eligible individuals and institutions as per the Scheme for Non-Competitive Bidding
Facility in the Auction of Government Securities.
The Floating Rate Bonds will be of 8-year tenure and will be issued at par. (i.e., at
Rs100.00 per cent).  The bonds will carry an interest rate, which is calculated by adding a
'spread' to a variable base rate. The 'spread' will be decided in the auction to be conducted
by Reserve Bank of India and will remain unchanged during the currency of the bonds. The
variable base rate will be the average rate of the implicit yields at cut-off prices emerging in
the immediate previous three auctions of ‘Government of India 364 day Treasury Bills’
held prior to the relative annual coupon reset period. The interest will be paid every half
year.  The base rate for calculation of interest for the first coupon period commencing from
August 8, 2003 to August 7, 2004 as per the aforesaid formula is 4.90 per cent (please see
enclosed illustration). The base rate for the subsequent annual coupon periods, worked out
as per the aforesaid formula, will be announced by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on or
before the commencement of the respective coupon period.
There will be no floor or cap on the interest rate on the Floating Rate Bonds.
In the unlikely event of 364-day Treasury Bill auctions being discontinued during the
currency of the FRB, the applicable variable base rate will be the average of the Yield to
Maturity (YTM) rate prevailing for one year Government of India Security as on last three
reporting Fridays prior to the commencement of the relative annual coupon period worked
out in consultation with the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of
India (FIMMDA). In case particular Friday/s is/are holiday/s, the yield to maturity rates on
the previous working day shall be taken. This rate will be announced by RBI on or before
the commencement of the relative annual coupon period.
The Floating Rate Bonds are being issued by the Government of India, on auction basis
for the fifth time. The bonds provide hedge against interest rate risk, offering returns linked
to short term yield.
The auction will be conducted by the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai Office, Fort,
Mumbai on Thursday, August 7, 2003. Applicants who wish to bid for the bonds will have
to clearly indicate in the prescribed form (obtainable from the Regional Director, RBI,
Mumbai Office, Fort, Mumbai) the nominal value of the bonds applied for, and the 'spread'
expected by them (up to two decimal places) on the base rate. Bids in prescribed form
should be deposited at RBI, Mumbai Office, Fort, Mumbai, on August 7, 2003 in the
appropriate tender box. However, the competitive bids by the NDS members should be
submitted only in electronic format using NDS. The non-competitive bids should be
submitted in the prescribed physical form and deposited in the appropriate tender box at
RBI, Mumbai Office, Fort, Mumbai. All bids should be submitted by 12.30 p.m. On the
basis of bids received, RBI will determine the maximum spread, at which offers will beaccepted. The auction will be conducted by using the Uniform Price Method where bids
offered up to and including the maximum spread as determined by Reserve Bank of India
will be accepted. Bids quoted at spreads higher than the spread determined by the Reserve
Bank of India will be rejected.
The results of the auction will be announced on August 7, 2003 and payment by
successful bidders will be during the banking hours on August 8, 2003. The bonds will be
repaid at par on August 8, 2011.
Bids for underwriting of the Bonds under auction can be submitted by the ‘Primary
Dealers in the Government Securities Market’ by 12.30 p.m. on Wednesday, August 6,
2003 to the Chief General Manager, Internal Debt Management Department, Reserve Bank
of India, Central Office , Fort, Mumbai 400 001.
For any further clarifications, interested investors may approach Chief General
Manager, Reserve Bank of India, IDM Department, Central Office, Mumbai.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/151
Illustration Word Pdf