RBI-SBI make redemption of Resurgent India Bonds(RIBs) : An Update
September 18, 2003.
Background
In an earlier Press Release dated July 11, 2003, the Reserve Bank of India had indicated
the arrangements put in place in association with State Bank of India to ensure smooth
redemption of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs). It has stated in the said press release that "the
Reserve Bank will issue an updated press release on the redemption arrangements for RIBs
closer to the date of their actual redemption".
With the approval of Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India, the RIBs were
floated by the SBI in August 1998.  SBI had collected USD 4.23 billion and the entire RIB
corpus was sold to RBI at the prevailing market exchange rate.  As consideration SBI was paid
Rs. 18,123 crore.  About 94.25 per cent of the corpus was in USD and the remaining in GBP and
EURO (then DEM). The RIBs are due for redemption on October 1, 2003 and are expected to be
in the vicinity of equivalent USD 5.5 billion.
Most of the foreign exchange required for redemption will be met by RBI directly (out of
forward purchases already in place) and the balance requirements of SBI will be provided by
RBI from out of its own resources. Thus no cognisable impact is anticipated on the foreign
exchange market.  Further  the arrangements put in place by RBI-SBI are expected to ensure
smooth conduct of operations in the money and foreign exchange markets though large
value/volume transactions may be condensed in a few days.
Impact of RIB redemption
The Reserve Bank will be infusing rupee liquidity into the market on account of purchase
of forward foreign currency assets and this will, to a great extent, neutralise  the rupee outgo
from SBI to RBI for purchasing the foreign exchange required for redemption. The balance lying
in the Maintenance of Value account built up during the last 5 years would  be used to meet the
exchange loss.  SBI would, therefore, be paying to RBI only the balance amount which would
depend on the market exchange rate prevailing on the date of redemption.  Going by the present
liquidity conditions in the market, it is felt that the  system should be in a position to take care of
the redemption requirements.  Further, the eligible market participants can take recourse to the
LAF of RBI (which consists of repo/reverse repo and backstop facilities) for short term
requirements of rupee funds.
Remobilisation of RIB redemption proceeds
In the Press Release issued on July 11, 2003  RBI has clarified that  banks will be free to
remobilize the redemption proceeds of RIBs strictly through the existing schemes available for
non-resident Indians for bank deposits or any other investments. The funds thus mobilized will
have no special features attached other than those available to existing deposits. The RBI will  be
closely monitoring the inflow into the deposit schemes viz. FCNR(B) and Non-Resident
(External) Account and appropriate operational strategies would be worked out to ensure smooth
absorption of the flows.The arrangements already made by RBI and SBI  are:
• RBI will promptly issue instructions to its correspondents abroad to deliver foreign
exchange to SBI/beneficiaries in three currencies viz. US Dollar, GBP and EURO to
cover the Principal and interest payments so that the bond holders receive their money on
the due date.
• SBI has made arrangements to receive back the rupee deposits placed with the banks,
which had associated with SBI in mobilization of RIBs.
• SBI has made arrangements for rupee resources to acquire foreign exchange from RBI.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/386