RBI constitutes Committees on Flow of Credit to Agriculture and SSIs
December 23, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India has constituted an Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit
to Agriculture and Related Activities from the Banking System and a Working Group on
Flow of Credit to SSI Sector. Both the committees are set up in terms of the Mid-Term
Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2003-04.
It has been the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to improve the agricultural credit
delivery mechanism by simplifying procedures, encouraging decentralised decision-making
and enhancing competition. In order to progress further in meeting the credit needs of the
agricultural sector, it was proposed to constitute an advisory committee to suggest short-term
and medium-term measures to enhance credit flow to the sector
The Committee on flow of credit to agriculture would be headed by noted economist,
Professor V.S. Vyas and a few other economists, bankers and administrators as its members.
The main terms of reference of the Committee include measures to reduce the rate of interest
on agriculture credit given by banks, to study the role and effectiveness of Rural and
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) mechanism, to identify impediments in the flow of
credit to the disadvantaged sections, to improve the flow of credit to agriculture, provision of
direct financing to farmers based on linkages, involving innovative location-specific catalytic
agents, to identify problems faced by banks in extending their outreach, the need for Service
Area Approach, etc. The Committee will also study the role of micro finance in poverty
alleviation and adoption of self-help group (SHG) approach.
Committee on SSI
The Committee on Flow of Credit to SSI sector with Dr. A. S. Ganguly, noted
Management Expert as its Chairman and other professionals and bankers as its members,
would look into the progress made in the implementation of Kapoor Committee and Gupta
Committee recommendations, suggest ways to improve credit flow to SSI sector, particularly
tiny sector and examine the issue of linkages with large corporates/producers and plans to
extend micro finance coverage, etc.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/770