Make Ordinary Bank Customer Ultimate Beneficiary of RTGS:
RBI urges Banks
July 21, 2003
Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India today urged banks to ensure
complete infrastructural and human resources readiness, and connectivity and security at their
end so that the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) facilities could percolate to the ordinary
customers. He added that one of the primary objectives of every central bank is to put in
place a modern, robust, secure and integrated payment and settlement system to enable the
common man to make payments to anyone he likes in the most efficient and cost effective
manner. Shri Kamesam was addressing chief executives of banks today at a meeting held in
the Reserve Bank of India. The meeting was called to take stock of the banks' preparedness
for RTGS implementation.
The RTGS system is scheduled to be delivered by the end of October 2003 followed
by installation, testing and commencement of parallel run before the year-end. The RTGS
system will facilitate large value inter bank payments and settlement in real time on-line
mode on a transaction by transaction basis. It will enhance systemic efficiency and minimise
the existing settlement risk.
Introduction of RTGS system has a number of pre-requisites. These include,
availability of industry-wide communication network, reliable resilient and state-of-the-art
computer platform for the implementation of the systemically important payment system
applications including the RTGS system, facilities for electronic based payment and
settlement, standardisation of message formats for inter and intra bank applications, robust
messaging system with facility for security of international standards, proper business process
re-engineering by each RTGS participant and facilities for advanced liquidity management.
Most of these prerequisites have already been met, it was noted.
In this context, the bankers discussed the need for having a second liquidity
adjustment facility auction, using SLR securities as a collateral during the day, possibility of
large credit transfers from customer accounts without notice and as such the need for better
cash management by banks. In this context, the Deputy Governor also pointed out that the
implementation of RTGS system will allow banks to offer newer products arising out of intra
day liquidity management. Another possibility according to him would be fee based RTGS
services to the customer, which may provide an additional source of revenue to the banks.
He, however, cautioned banks that implementation of RTGS system will affect the
availability of float funds to them and they may have to re-look at the price structure of their
products.
Reviewing the progress of RTGS, the Deputy governor pointed out that the Reserve
Bank has already operationalised the Centralised Fund Management System(CFMS) which
provides banks on-line information on their aggregate funds position maintained across 15
RBI centres. Further, the Reserve Bank will, by September 2003, make available fund
transfer facilities between banks and RBI offices under the Centralised Fund Management
System.  The Structured Financial Messaging System(SFMS) has been implemented on the
lines of SWIFT which is a messaging system for international funds transfer with adequate
security.2
The Deputy Governor called upon the chief executives of banks to play a catalytic
role in building up opinion within the organisation and also among bank customers. He
stressed upon ensuring complete infrastructural and human resources readiness so that the
RTGS facilities could percolate to the ordinary customers. Pointing out that the RTGS system
will be a credit transfer system as against the present payment system which is based on
cheques and instruments resulting in debit transfer system, he clarified that RTGS would
require re-orientation of customer banking and therefore customer education. Connectivity
among bank branches in 21 centres where the Reserve Bank has its offices and also between
bank branches in 126 commercially important centres was also important. The ultimate
objective, according to Shri Kamesam, was to reach the ordinary customers not only in the
cities but also in the countryside.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/96