Work towards A World Class Banking System in India :
RBI Deputy Governor exhorts Banks
December  9, 2003
"The regulatory guidelines can at best represent the minimum requirements which the
supervisor expects each bank to achieve. The sophisticated banks have to set their own
standards for risk management depending on their risk appetite, the products, the portfolios
and the markets in which they operate". This was stated by Smt.K.J. Udeshi, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India. She was delivering the inaugural address at a Conference
on Banking and Trade Finance. The Conference was organised by the International Chamber
of Commerce (India) in New Delhi today.
Explaining the advantage of complying with risk management guidelines, the Deputy
Governor stated that efficient risk management systems could create value for the banks by
allowing them to make the best use of their capital, which in turn, would be a source of
competitive advantage to the banks besides generating positive externalities for a sound and
suitable banking system. "While the Reserve Bank would like banks to optimally manage
their credit and market risks, it would like the banks to totally eliminate operational risks,"
she added. The Deputy Governor also urged banks that alongwith risk based internal audit,
the banks must also put in place proper risk management architecture, strengthen the MIS and
information technology, address HRD issues and set up compliance units. These steps, she
added, would enable a smooth transition to the risk based supervision currently being
implemented in India. The risk based supervision provided incentives to the banks for
adoption of smooth sophisticated risk management techniques and this, together with sound
corporate governance, should lead to the creation of a banking system that was world class,
she hoped. The Reserve Bank, on its part, would continue to ensure financial stability,
strengthen prudential norms to bring them on par with international best practices consistent
with the specific needs of Indian banks as also progressively strengthen the supervisory
framework, the Deputy Governor assured. The Deputy Governor further added that the focus
of the Reserve Bank's policy initiatives was on streamlining banking operations in order to
reduce transactions cost, infusing flexibility into the system, upgrading the risk management
systems, enhancing the level of compliance by banks with accounting standards and
operationalising consolidated accounting practices. "Providing the public with a financial
system that they can trust is the most important focus of the Reserve Bank's policy
initiatives", she underlined.
The Reserve Bank was also attempting to enforce certain discipline on market players
with strong and self-governance standards transparent to investors and customers. A Standing
Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services provided by the
Reserve Bank and    Ad hoc Committee on Customer Services being set up by each bank are
expected to bring about a significant improvement in customer service in the financial sector.
Addressing the critical issue, that is of receiving  international concern, of money
laundering, the Deputy Governor stated that the Reserve Bank had issued several guidelines
to banks and non-banking financial companies to implement the "Know Your Customer"
principle. The basic aim of these guidelines was to prevent banks from being unwittingly
used as the channel of funds derived from criminal activity or financing terrorism. However,
as financial transactions grew more complex, it became more difficult for banks to maintain acustomer profile, she pointed out and added that the challenge  for the banks was to ensure
that they knew their customers without hindering the smooth flow of financial transactions.
The Deputy Governor highlighted the several measures that the Reserve Bank had
taken to ensure adequate flow of credit towards export related activities including
introduction of a transparent reporting system for export credit interest rates. She, however,
pointed out that finance can only act as a facilitator. In the context of globalisation, the
demand for the product and its competitiveness on quality considerations are two important
conditions to be satisfied. According to the Deputy Governor, the Reserve Bank had provided
the enabling conditions for promotion of trade and investment, both domestic and
international, by ensuring adequate liquidity, a competitive interest rate regime, measures to
encourage decentralised decision making and ease procedures in the credit delivery systems
and most importantly, financial stability in the midst of a world economy beset by uncertainty
and recessionary trends.  It was now necessary for market participants to have enough
confidence to make investment decisions, she added.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/716