RBI Annual Report 2002-2003:Highlights
August 27, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India released its Annual Report for 2002-2003. Some
highlights:
Assessment of 2002-2003
Overall performance
The Indian economy performed reasonably well in 2002-03, in spite of the impact of a
number of adverse developments during the year, both internal and external. The country
experienced its worst drought in fifteen years, which led to an estimated fall of 29 million
tonnes in food production, the largest in a year since Independence. The tensions leading up
to the Iraq war had resulted in a significant oil price rise. Furthermore, the global economy
exhibited an environment of generalised uncertainty and low growth.
Resilient economy
A review of India’s economy ever since Independence would show that the
occurrence of any one of such shocks would have invariably produced an economic crisis
involving a sharp loss of growth, higher inflation, balance of payments difficulties, and even
financial instability in the economy. Seen in this context, the Indian economy exhibited
remarkable resilience in the year gone by. Timely and coordinated supply management
strategies were effective, with headline inflation remaining benign through most of the year;
industrial activity witnessed a revival after a number of lean years; merchandise exports grew
by 19.2 percent despite low world trade growth; foreign exchange reserves grew by US $22
billion, a record for any fiscal year for India. It is interesting to note that unlike other such
difficult years in the past when India had to turn to the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
for assistance, India actually became a creditor to the IMF under its Financial Transactions
Plan.
Industrial growth
One notable feature of the country’s economic performance in the last fiscal year has
been the recovery of the industrial sector after an extended slowdown. Growth in sales and
profits of large companies has shown encouraging trends. The fall in both nominal and real
interest rates that has taken place over the past two years has aided this process of recovery.
Industrial exports exhibited high growth on a broad basis, despite slow growth of world trade.
The enhanced growth in non-oil non-gold imports in the current fiscal year is pointing to a
continuing industrial recovery. Thus, industry is showing signs of increased competitiveness
after a prolonged period of internal restructuring necessitated by competitive pressures
emanating from both domestic and international sources.
Monetary management
Monetary policy was effective in ensuring stability and orderliness in the domestic
money, debt and foreign exchange markets. The expansionary impact of large capital flows
was managed through timely action in the form of open market sales and Liquidity
Adjustment Facility (LAF) operations, supported by a sequenced liberalisation of outward
international transactions. Interest rates declined in all segments of the market spectrum in
response to the monetary policy stance of facilitating a softer interest rate regime that would
support the revival of investment demand. The active management of liquidity conditions
enabled the successful completion of the market borrowing programme of the Centre and the
States. Public debt management was strengthened through prepayment of high cost external
1debt, debt swaps between the Centre and the States, along with a comprehensive restructuring
of the scheme of ways and means advances and overdrafts for the States.
Financial stability
Ensuring financial stability continued to be the dominant objective underlying the
intensification of financial sector reforms during 2002-03. Prudential norms were
strengthened further, consistent with the strategy to bring about greater convergence with
international best practices. Significant initiatives were taken to strengthen the balance sheets
of banks. Better management of non-performing assets ( NPAs) was enabled by the
operationalisation of the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism and the enactment
of The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest (SARFAESI) Act. This will help the enforcement of creditors’ rights and will also
enable the establishment of Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs). The supervisory
function was improved considerably through the institution of the Prompt Corrective Action
mechanism as an early warning tool. The development of financial markets was carried
forward by developing the infrastructure for the retailing of government securities by order
driven, screen based trading in stock exchanges and the introduction of exchange traded
interest rate derivatives. These developments will enable market participants to manage
market risk better. The impact of financial sector reforms is reflected in an improvement in
the profitability of banks and in the overall efficiency of the financial sector.
In brief
The Indian economy can, therefore, be seen as having matured, consequent to
economic policy reforms and careful macroeconomic management. The role of substantial
foreign exchange and food reserves in promoting such economic stability in the presence of
domestic and international adversity needs to be explicitly recognised. Food grain reserves
fell from about 63.1 million tonnes in June 2002 to 35.2 million tonnes a year later. There
could have been significant price pressures had the food reserves been of a much lower
magnitude. Similarly, the existence of large foreign exchange reserves has cushioned the
economy from the emergence of any lack of international confidence that could have arisen
from rising international oil prices.
Prospects for 2003-2004
GDP Growth Rate
The year 2003-04 has begun on a strong positive note. Excess rainfall relative to the
long period average in July 2003 and revised projections suggesting a normal monsoon, have
brightened the prospects for a substantial agricultural recovery this year. Based on
information then available, the Reserve Bank had made a projection of 6.0 per cent growth in
real GDP for 2003-04 in the Statement on Monetary and Credit Policy in April 2003. In light
of the expected strong agricultural recovery along with a healthy industrial performance, that
projection may now be exceeded significantly. However, a full reassessment of the projected
growth rate for the current year will be attempted in the mid term review of the Monetary and
Credit Policy in October 2003, by which time reliable information on the progress of the
monsoon and spread of the industrial upturn will become available.
Inflation
Inflation had exhibited a rising tendency toward the end of the last fiscal year,
reaching a final rate of 6.5 per cent in the last week of March 2003. Based on a careful study
of domestic and international price developments, the Reserve Bank had projected falling
inflation from the second quarter of this year. That has indeed happened and headline
2inflation has fallen below 4 per cent now. In light of the normal monsoon and consequent
agricultural recovery, inflation is expected to remain benign in the rest of the fiscal year, and
could well fall below the projected rate of 5.0 to 5.5 per cent.
Infrastructure reforms
Infrastructure reforms have begun to bear fruit. The past fiscal year witnessed rapid
progress in the road sector, both in the National Highway Development Programme and rural
roads. There have been palpable efficiency gains in ports through the privatisation of ports’
services and berths: turn around time of ships has fallen significantly and waiting time for
ships has been almost eliminated. The telecom sector has perhaps seen the most significant
developments. Tariffs in the telecom sector have declined sharply in response to deregulation,
competition and technology. Consequently, there has been a sharp increase in the growth of
telephone lines, particularly in mobile services. Reforms in the power sector, however, are
still in process, but are likely to accelerate after the passing of the Electricity Bill. The
Ahluwalia report is now being implemented, with past dues of State Electricity Boards being
securitised, and the commitment of State Governments to be current on payments of dues
henceforth. However, reforms in the civil aviation, urban infrastructure, and railways are still
to take root.
Medium Term Issues
The Tenth Five Year Plan has projected an annual growth rate of 8 per cent in GDP as
its target, a growth rate that is much higher than achieved so far in any Plan period.
Achievement of such a growth rate will need increased investment rates accompanied by
improvements in efficiency all round. Financing the increased investment rate will require a
substantially enhanced domestic saving rate along with more efficient and higher absorption
of foreign savings for investment. The ongoing reform process will therefore need to be
intensified in all spheres, particularly in agriculture, industry and infrastructure.
Agriculture
The drought of 2002-03 has renewed concerns relating to the high variability of
agricultural output related to the performance of the monsoon. This is partly due to the
concentration in the cropping pattern that has resulted from the Minimum Support Price
policy favouring rice and wheat, and which skews the incentive structure away from other
agricultural products. The issues arising from this policy are well known, as are its benefits.
Whereas food security will need continuing emphasis through the assurance of adequate
availability of essential food grains, and maintenance of food stocks, higher agricultural
growth will now have to come from a much more diversified agriculture. Such diversification
will need much more complex commercial linkages between farm and market, and greater
attention to the potential for employment and value added provided by food processing
activities. Investment in rural infrastructure such as rural roads, storage facilities,
telecommunications, power and the like will need to be accelerated. The challenge will be to
find appropriate sources of financing, and innovative processes for faster implementation and
improved maintenance of such infrastructure assets. The forging of public private
partnerships and greater participation of local governments will have to be pursued.
The successful introduction and implementation of the green revolution owed much to
the support provided by the Indian agricultural research and extension system. Now this
system must be geared to a reprioritisation of investment on new technologies so that
agricultural diversification can be accelerated for the achievement of higher productivity
levels. Effective adoption of new technologies in a wider variety of crops and other
agricultural products will also require a different kind of extension system that is more
3flexible and customised to the needs of different farmer groups in different regions of the
country. Here also the energies of the private sector have to be harnessed for the greater good.
Industry
It has now become evident that, in order to cope with the competitive rigours of the
new globalising economic environment, the industrial sector has been undergoing very
significant restructuring since the second half of the 1990s. The benefits of this ongoing
process of restructuring are now being manifested through the improved industrial
performance of 2002-03 and its continuation in this fiscal year, buoyant export performance
of manufactured products, and better financial results of industrial companies. Further
acceleration of this industrial recovery to achieve the 10 percent annual growth envisaged in
the Tenth plan is a major challenge that will require a renewed emphasis on industrial
reforms. First, the ongoing industrial tariff reform process towards lower tariff levels can be
accelerated in view of the emerging competitiveness of Indian industry and consequent
current account surplus. Industrial tariffs were reduced systematically during the 1992-97
period and then again since 2001. Industrial and export growth responded well in both
instances. Second, good progress has been made recently in enabling potentially greater
corporate flexibility in the face of a constantly changing economic environment. The reform
in bankruptcy laws, implementation of the corporate debt restructuring mechanism,
functioning of the Debt Recovery Tribunals and enactment of the SARFAESI Act are all
steps in the right direction. These steps need to be reinforced through implementation of the
proposed labour reforms, abolition of the urban land ceiling laws in the remaining states, and
further progress in the removal of small scale industry reservations. The attainment of greater
flexibility in the industrial sector will help in promoting greater growth in both industrial
production and employment.
Financial Sector Issues
The overall policy environment has succeeded in fostering a significant degree of
soundness in the financial system. Banks have gained from the falling interest rates that have
enabled them to make significant gains from their large holdings in gilts. However, at the
same time, banks need to make larger provisions for investment fluctuation reserves to take
care of potential risks that are now inherent in a regime of flexible interest rates and exchange
rates. In line with international best practices, the Reserve Bank announced a timetable to
move to the 90-day norm for loan impairment, effective March 2004. Recent trends in
exchange rate and interest rate movements have led to a greater demand from corporates for
foreign currency loans from Indian banks. Since many of these loans could well be unhedged,
banks need to put in place systems that monitor such unhedged external liabilities, along with
measures to contain such risk. As the Indian economy opens further, such developments will
need to be watched more carefully. Thus there is a general need for better risk management in
the financial system through the pro active building up of investment fluctuation reserve,
provisioning in respect of problem assets, sophisticated use of available derivatives, and the
development of markets for risk management products.
Whereas the financial sector reforms have focused on improving the efficiency of the
banking system, and more lately on risk management, it is important that banks continue to
finance adequately activities that are of crucial importance to growth. The fostering of
entrepreneurship in new industrial activities, in the emerging service sector and non-
traditional agricultural activities, will all require proactive financing from banks and financial
institutions. With the decline of the traditional term lending institutions, banks have to
4develop new appraisal capabilities so that these needs do not remain unmet. For the financing
of larger corporates, the development of a vibrant corporate bond market is a must.
Infrastructure
The key to more rapid industrial expansion in the medium term is the modernisation
and deepening of physical infrastructure. Faster growth in infrastructure investment has been
constrained by the lack of adequate cost recovery due to the levy of inadequate user charges,
and inefficient collection mechanism. Provision for public goods has to be made from tax
resources whereas private goods and services should be financed by the levy of user charges.
Public private partnerships can also be used to beneficial effect in the efficient delivery of
infrastructure services. It is at the State Government level that many infrastructure services
are provided; hence reforms in the infrastructure sector, which also involve public sector
reform, are equally important at both the central and state levels. Financing of infrastructure
remains an important concern; it has to be addressed through a combination of greater
facilitation of private investment, along with greater public investment as well. Improvement
in the fiscal situation the country is, therefore, a primary requirement for accelerated all round
growth.
Fiscal Policy Issues
The main challenge that requires constant vigil in the macroeconomic sphere is that of
reducing high fiscal deficits, at both the central and state levels. The issues governing fiscal
problems are well known. The enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Act is a very significant step in correcting the chronic fiscal imbalances that
have emerged. Some states have also enacted similar legislations. Whereas expenditure
compression must remain a continuing quest it is now difficult to make substantial savings
because of rigidities in the composition of expenditure, except in the area of subsidies. The
levy and collection of adequate user charges would help significantly in reducing non-merit
subsidies at all levels. Much greater attention now needs to be paid to the revenue side.
Despite healthy economic growth the tax/GDP ratio has fallen through the decade of the
1990s, and revenue deficits, therefore, now constitute more than two thirds of the fiscal
deficit. This trend has to be reversed through more efficient and greater tax revenue
collection at all levels. Use of information technology can revolutionise the systems of tax
collection. The strength of the country’s information technology sector can be put to good use
for this purpose. These actions are essential to correct and reverse the trend of increasing
public sector dissavings that have emerged in recent years. Positive public sector savings are
necessary to finance essential physical and social sector investments that will crowd in
private sector investments for the achievement of higher self-sustaining and accelerated
growth.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/269
5