Smt K J Udeshi appointed RBI Deputy Governor
June 10, 2003
Smt. K J Udeshi has been today appointed as a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank
of India. The Government of India has, in its notification issued today, stated that she will
hold charge as the Deputy Governor till October 12, 2005 when she attains the age of 62 or
until further orders.
Born in 1943, Smt. Udeshi is a post graduate in Economics, is a diploma holder in
Bank Management from National Institute of Bank Management and is a Certificated
Associate of the Indian Institute of Bankers (CAIIB). Joining the Reserve Bank in 1965, she
rose from the ranks and was appointed as Executive Director in 2001. She has had a long stint
in exchange control and the Reserve Bank's internal administration and human resources
departments.
Smt. Udeshi has been an RBI nominee on the Board of State Bank of India, has been
a member of the Governing Board of the National Institute of Bank Management, Institute of
Banking Personnel Selection, a member on the Governing Council of Institute for
Development and Research in Banking Technology, a member on the Apex Committee on
Market Awareness, Securities and Exchange Board of India. She has also been a co-
chairperson on Sub-Group on Banking and Finance, Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental
Commission for Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural Co-operation.
Smt. Udeshi is the first woman Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India.
Resume
Smt. K. J. Udeshi
Deputy Governor
Date of Birth : : October 13, 1943
Educational Qualification M.A.(Economics), CAIIB, Post Graduate Diploma in Bank
:
Management
Experience
• Worked in RBI’s Bangalore, Ahmedabad & Mumbai offices
• Held the charge of Ahmedabad Office• Worked in various Central Office departments, looking after exchange
control/management, policies relating to Personnel, Human Resources Management,
Premises, etc.
Current Assignments
• Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India
• RBI Nominee Director on the Board of State Bank of India
• Member - Governing Board - National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM)
• Member - Governing Board - Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS)
• Member – Governing Council – Institute for Development & Research in Banking
Technology (IDRBT)
• Member – Apex Committee on Market Awareness – Securities and Exchange Board
of India (SEBI)
• Co-Chairperson - Sub-Group on Banking & Finance,  Indo-Russian Inter-
Governmental Commission (IRIGC) for Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological
and Cultural Co-operation.
Assignments handled in the past
• RBI Nominee Director on the Board of Bank of Maharashtra
• Member – High Powered Jury on Evaluation of Reports on Policy Drafts of the
National Manufacturing Competition, headed by ex-Cabinet Secretary under the aegis
of  “We Think India” (WTI)
Important International Seminars attended
• Seminar on Central Banking – Members of Asian & other countries – conducted by
the Bank of Japan, Tokyo - 1982
nd
• 22 Central Banking Seminar - Federal Reserve Bank of New York - 1997
• Global Senior Policy Seminar : “Capital Flows, Monetary Policy and the International
Financial System” – organised by World Bank Institute – Paris - 2003
Publication
• Article on “India’s Foreign Exchange Market : A Decade of Liberalisation“ published
in Economic Developments in India (EDI) by Academic Foundation.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/1265