RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2003-04
Highlights
Statement follows the pattern already set in the previous years – both in outline
and substance.
Domestic Developments
• GDP growth in 2003-04 placed at 6.5-7.0 per cent, with an upward bias,
compared to 6.0 per cent  projected in April.
• Inflation projected for policy purposes at 4.0-4.5 per cent, with a possible
downward bias, as compared with earlier projection of 5.0-5.5 per cent.
• Money Supply (M ) growth within the projected level as envisaged in
3
April.
• Lower increase in reserve money despite sharp increase in forex inflows.
• Total resource flow to the commercial sector around the same level as last
year.
• Government borrowing of over 60 per cent of the budgeted amount
completed with longer maturities and at lower cost to Government.
• Fiscal deficit as at end-September higher compared to last year.
• Reduction in interest rates in financial markets and deposits observed.
• Noticeable reduction in banks’ lending rates except for corporates and
housing segment yet to take place.
External Developments
• Orderly conditions witnessed in the forex market.
• Rupee appreciated against US dollar but depreciated against Euro, Pound
sterling and Japanese yen.
• Foreign Exchange reserves up by US $ 17.2 billion since             end-
March to US $ 92.6 billion by end-October 2003, and are at comfortable
level.
• Exchange rate management, as in the past, based on flexibility, without a
fixed or pre-announced target, but with ability to intervene.
• RIBs of US $ 5.5 billion redeemed without any adverse impact on
financial market and reserves.
• In the first half, in US dollar terms, exports are up by 10 per cent and
import growth is high at 21.4 per cent reflecting a pick up in economic
activity, as evident from higher capital goods imports.
Overall Assessment
• Improved macroeconomic environment with positive outlook on both the
domestic and external fronts.
• Gains from lower inflationary expectations in the recent years need to be
consolidated and reinforced.
• Improved investment climate to help in revival of investment demand.
• Financial market sentiments stronger, but there is need for monitoring
and providing for unforeseen contingencies.• Health of the financial sector continues to improve despite concerns with
regard to a segment of financial institutions.
• Signs of pick-up in non-food credit since August 2003.
• Need to nurture conducive credit culture among financial intermediaries,
corporates and households.
• Credible actions required to address rigidity in lending rates and to
improve quality of financial services.
• Virtual elimination of binding forex constraints imparts strength to  the
economic management and accords comfort to the conduct of public
policy.
Stance of Monetary Policy
• Expectations of higher GDP growth, benign inflation outlook, subdued
growth in money supply and stronger capital flows prompt continuation
with the overall stance of monetary policy announced in April 2003.
• The stance of monetary policy continues to be provision of adequate
liquidity to meet credit growth and support investment demand with a
vigil on the price level with preference for soft and flexible interest rate
environment.
• Continuance of measures with an accent on implementation with the
objective of facilitating ease of transactions by the common persons.
• Support economic growth consistent with stability by strengthening of
institutional capacity through a consultative process in the medium-term.
Measures
• Bank Rate kept unchanged at 6 per cent.
• Cash reserve ratio kept unchanged at 4.5 per cent in view of current
liquidity situation.
• The Report of the Internal Group on liquidity adjustment facility (LAF)
(which proposed a review of this facility) being placed on the RBI web-site
for wider dissemination and comments.
• IBA to advise banks on benchmark PLR.
• Measures to improve credit delivery to agriculture and small scale
sectors.
• Advisory Committee/Working Group proposed to make a comprehensive
review and suggest ways to improve credit flow to agriculture and small
scale sectors and better deployment of RIDF and priority sector resources
with SIDBI.
• Simplification of procedures and complete flexibility in micro-finance
structure proposed to boost credit flow.
• Further move towards pure inter-bank call/notice money market.
• Flexibility in sale of government securities contracted for purchase with
adequate safeguards.
• Banks to ensure hedging of foreign currency loans to corporates above US
$ 10 million except for exporters and for forex expenditures.
• Flexibility to exporters in realisation of export proceeds and write off of
overdues, up to 10 per cent of their export proceeds in a calendar year.
2• Banks advised to quickly build up investment fluctuation reserve (IFR) so
that they are better positioned to meet interest rate risks.
• Road map for financial institutions to adopt 90 days norm for recognition
of loan impairment.
• Standing Technical Advisory Committee on Financial Regulation for both
banks and non-banks proposed.
• Identification and special monitoring system for Systemically Important
Financial Intermediaries (SIFIs) proposed in coordination with RBI,
SEBI and IRDA.
• Standing Committee to be set up on Procedures and Performance Audit
on Public Services rendered by the Reserve Bank.
• Banks advised to constitute Ad-hoc Committees to improve customer
services including review of RBI regulations impinging on customer
services.
• Working Group proposed to address regulatory and supervisory issues
pertaining to Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).
• Extension of good corporate governance practices to PDs, NBFCs and
FIs.
• RTGS system scheduled for introduction in January 2004.
• Economic and financial data base with RBI to be placed in public domain
for convenience of researchers and other users.
• Select private banks authorised to conduct government business for
public convenience.
• Payment of tax refunds through electronic clearing services (ECS) to be
introduced.
• Measures for provision of clean currency notes and availability of coins
for the convenience of common persons.
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2003-04
Dr. Y. Venugopal Reddy, Governor, in a meeting with Chief Executives of major
commercial banks today presented the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit
Policy for 2003-04. At the outset, Governor mentioned that the Statement follows the
pattern already set in the previous years - both in outline and substance. Governor’s
Statement covered a review of macroeconomic and monetary developments with
several analytical and operational issues concerning monetary policy. Governor
announced continuance of the stance of monetary policy for the remaining part of the
year on the basis of developments since April 2003, and announced certain measures.
Governor emphasized on continuance of measures already taken with an accent on
implementation to facilitate ease of transactions by the common person. Governor
proposed measures to further broaden the consultative process and stressed on
institutional capacity building to support growth consistent with stability in a medium-
term perspective.
3Domestic Developments
GDP Growth in 2003-04
Taking into account the performance and spatial distribution of the South West
monsoon and assuming the continuance of good performance in industry and some
acceleration in exports reflecting the anticipated global economic recovery, Governor
said that it is reasonable to expect an overall GDP growth of 6.5  to 7.0 per cent for
the year 2003-04 with an upward bias, as compared with the earlier projection of
around 6.0 per cent.
Non-food Credit
Governor observed a moderate increase in non-food credit by 5.7 per cent up
to October 17, 2003 as compared with an increase of 7.4 per cent in the corresponding
period of the previous year.  At Rs.55,045 crore, the total flow of resources to the
commercial sector so far is comparable with an increase of Rs.55,697 crore in the
previous year. However, a significant growth of retail credit was observed,
particularly to the housing sector. He expected that the recent removal of the
restriction, of the prime lending rate (PLR) being the floor rate for loans to the retail
and personal segment, should provide further impetus to retail lending.
Monetary indicators
Referring to monetary indicators, Governor said that money supply during the
current financial year up to October 17, 2003 increased by 7.4 per cent compared with
8.1 per cent in the previous year.   He said that on an annual basis, the growth in M at
3 
11.9 per cent was within the projected level, but lower than that of 14.0 per cent in the
previous year.  RBI’s net foreign current assets increased by Rs.63,873 crore up to
October 24, 2003 compared to the increase of Rs.38,452 crore last year.  Despite such
large foreign exchange inflows, Governor said, the reserve money increased by only
3.5 per cent, as against an increase of 0.4 per cent in the corresponding period of the
previous year mainly due to substantial open market operations (OMO) by the
Reserve Bank.
Inflation rate to decline
Governor recalled that the annual policy Statement had projected inflation rate
to be in the range of 5.0-5.5 per cent for 2003-04. The annual rate of inflation as
measured by variations in the wholesale price index (WPI), on a point-to-point basis,
which remained in the range of 6.3-6.9 per cent during the first two months of this
year declined to 5.0 per cent by October 18, 2003. Governor indicated that, the point-
to-point annual rate of inflation, for policy purposes, is likely to be in the range of 4.0-
4.5 per cent, with a possible downward bias.
Government borrowings
The Central Government completed net market borrowings of 62.8 per cent
and gross borrowings of 60.8 per cent of the budgeted amount by      end-October
2003. The weighted average yield on government borrowings at 5.87 per cent this
year, has been lower than 7.34 per cent last year.  The gross fiscal defict of Central
4Government at Rs.81,014 crore up to September 2003 was higher  by about 40.3 per
cent over the corresponding period of last year.  Revenue deficit of the Central
Government at the Rs.65,427 crore was higher by about 37.4 per cent over the same
period.  Governor said that the persistence of large aggregate borrowing of the Central
and state governments continues to be a matter of concern.   Such concerns arise both
out of a possible adverse impact on the desired acceleration in growth that is
consistent with stability, and also from possible implications for efficient monetary
and debt management. It was, therefore, essential to pursue, promptly and with
resolve, fiscal consolidation from a medium-term perspective.  There is need for
efforts in the direction of widening the revenue base, rationalisation of expenditures,
and above all enhancing productivity of public investments, already made or to be
made, in both commercial and social sectors.
Banks’ Investments
Governor indicated that scheduled commercial banks’ investment in
government and other approved securities at Rs.87,754 crore this year (up to October
17, 2003) has been higher than Rs.72,110 crore of the previous year.
Interest Rates
Governor observed that financial markets have remained generally stable and
interest rates have softened further with liquidity in the system.  The average call
money rate moved down from 5.86 per cent to 4.64 per cent; the 91-day and the 364-
day Treasury Bill rates have declined from 5.89 per cent each to 4.94 and 4.72 per
cent, respectively, the yield on government securities with 10-year residual maturity
declined from 6.21 per cent to 5.11 per cent; the public sector banks have reduced
their deposit rates over one year from a range of 5.25-7.00 per cent in March 2003 to
5.0-6.0 per cent by October 2003.   The median lending rates on demand and term
loans levied by public sector banks, however, remained unchanged in a range of 11.5-
14.0 per cent.  Similarly, the range of prime lending rates (PLRs) of public sector
banks remained unchanged at 9.0-12.25 per cent.  On the other hand, the spread
between AAA-rated corporate bonds of 5 years and the yield on government
securities of similar maturity narrowed from 87 basis points in March 2003 to 65 basis
points by October 2003.   Governor observed that while lending rates for prime
corporates and activities like housing have declined significantly, noticeable reduction
is yet to take place in regard to other segments.
External Developments
Global economic prospects improved
Governor noted that the prospects for world economy have improved since
April 2003 when the annual policy Statement was presented.
Forex market remains stable
The Indian forex market generally witnessed orderly conditions during the
current financial year (April-October 2003).  The exchange rate of the rupee, which
was Rs.47.50 per US dollar at end-March 2003 appreciated by 4.8 per cent to
Rs.45.32 per US dollar by end-October 2003 but depreciated by 2.3 per cent against
5Euro, 2.5 per cent against Pound Sterling and 4.2 per cent against Japanese yen during
the period.  Governor said that exchange rate management is based, as in the past, on
flexibility without a fixed or pre-announced target, but with ability to intervene.
Reserves increase
Foreign Exchange reserves increased by US $ 17.2 billion from US $ 75.4
billion in end-March 2003 to US $ 92.6 billion by end-October 2003. Governor said
that India’s foreign exchange reserves are at present comfortable and consistent with
the rate of growth, the share of the external sector in the economy and the size of risk-
adjusted capital flows.  He said that during this period, the payments obligation on
account of redemption of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs) of US $ 5.5 billion was
discharged without any adverse impact either on Indian financial market or on
reserves.
Exports and imports
India’s exports during the first half of the current financial year increased by
10.0 per cent in US dollar terms as compared with 18.0 per cent in the corresponding
period of the previous year.   During the same period, imports rose faster by 21.4 per
cent as against an increase of 9.2 per cent in the corresponding period of last year.
The current account of the balance of payments, which had remained in
surplus consecutively in the previous six quarters, showed a deficit of US $ 1.2 billion
during April-June 2003.  The net accretion to foreign exchange reserves, including
valuation change, amounted to US $ 6.7 billion during the first quarter of 2003-04.
While for well-known reasons, it is difficult to anticipate the behaviour of capital
flows, Governor said, the positive sentiment on India should augur well for continued
buoyancy, but some moderation should not be ruled out if the stance of monetary
policies in leading industrial economies were to transit from soft or neutral to a
relatively tighter regime.
Overall Assessment
Governor said that the macroeconomic environment has improved during the
year with a positive outlook on both the domestic and external fronts.  The point-to-
point WPI inflation is expected to moderate by the end of the year.  The gains
obtained in recent years from the reining in of inflationary expectations need to be
consolidated and reinforced as inflationary expectations can turn adverse in a
relatively short time if noticeable adverse movements in prices take place.  Hence, a
continued emphasis on vigil on the price level is essential.
Governor added that the investment climate during the year has improved as
reflected in the functioning of various segments of the financial market.  As
productivity gains have been significantly harnessed from large-scale corporate
restructuring from investment made, there could be revival of investment demand at
this juncture.  He also observed that the financial market sentiments are stronger now
compared to the beginning of the year and the health of the financial sector continued
to improve.  However, there is need for continuous and careful monitoring providing
for unforeseen contingencies since in the upturn of the business cycle there could be
overshooting of markets.
6Governor indicated that though credit growth remained subdued till August
2003, there are since some signs of pick-up in non-food credit.  He said that there is a
need to further improve the institutional as well as incentive mechanisms in banks to
strengthen credit delivery to small and medium enterprises (SMEs), infrastructure and
agriculture. In this regard, it is important that conducive credit culture is nurtured
among financial intermediaries, corporates and households.  He added that apart from
subdued credit growth, which will continue to cause concern, the overall rigidity in
the downward movement of lending rates as well as inadequacy in quality of service
to some sections coupled with reduction in deposit rates requires introspection and
immediate action on the part of all financial intermediaries.  In this regard, credible
actions, particularly by the commercial banks, would be essential, to make adequate
progress in credit delivery and appropriate transparency in the pricing of credit.
Governor said that the positive developments in the external sector which have
virtually eliminated the binding forex constraints impart substantial strength to the
economic management of our country and accords comfort to the conduct of public
policy.
Stance of Monetary Policy for the second half of 2003-04
Governor said that since announcement of the annual policy Statement in
April 2003, the world economic outlook has improved; GDP growth is placed higher;
the outlook for inflation is more benign; expansion in money supply is within the
trajectory; and financial markets, especially forex markets, are stable, though they
displayed more than usual activity.  He said that the flow of credit has been less than
anticipated so far although recent indications point towards improvement in the
remaining part of the year. While capital flows are stronger, current account is
possibly turning to deficit. Consistent with these developments, he proposed to
continue with the overall stance of monetary policy announced in the annual policy
Statement for the remaining half of the current year.
The stance of monetary policy would continue to be provision of adequate
liquidity to meet credit growth and support investment demand with a vigil on price
level with preference for soft and flexible interest rate environment.
Financial Sector Reforms and Monetary Policy Measures
Governor said that the emphasis at this stage is on continuance of measures
already taken with an accent on implementation, facilitating ease of transactions by
the common person, further broadening of the consultative process and continued
emphasis on institutional capacity to support growth consistent with stability in a
medium-term perspective.  He said that it is proposed to consider strengthening of the
credit delivery system within the existing institutional framework so that financing
gaps do not seriously constrain the desired acceleration in growth.
(a) Bank Rate – Kept unchanged at 6.0 per cent.
(b) Cash Reserve Ratio –  Kept unchanged at 4.5 per cent in view of current
liquidity situation.
(c) Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)
7The report of an Internal Group on the operations of LAF in a cross-country
perspective, which was revised based on the recent discussions in the Technical
Advisory Committee on Money and Government Securities Markets (TAC), is being
placed on the RBI website www.rbi.org.in for wider dissemination and comments.
The guidelines on LAF will be finalised taking into account the suggestions received
on the Report.
Interest Rate Policy
(a) Prime Lending Rate and Spreads
The issues relating to the implementation of the system of benchmark PLR
were discussed with select banks and the Indian Banks Association (IBA).  As IBA
has indicated broad agreement with the approach proposed for the benchmark PLR,
IBA may advise its members suitably, keeping in view the operational requirements.
Credit Delivery Mechanism
(a) Priority Sector Lending
(i)  Credit Facilities for Small Scale Industries
In order to further improve the flow of credit to small scale industries (SSIs), it
is proposed that:
• Banks may, on the basis of good track record and the financial position of the
SSI units, increase the loan limit from Rs.15 lakh up to Rs.25 lakh (with the
approval of their Boards) for dispensation of collateral requirement, in respect
of SSI units.
   (ii) Deposits of Foreign Banks with SIDBI
In order to increase the flow of credit to SSIs and to rationalise the interest
rates, it is proposed that:
• The interest rate on the deposits of foreign banks placed with SIDBI towards
their priority sector shortfall will be at the Bank Rate.
• SIDBI will take appropriate steps to ensure that priority sector funds are
utilised expeditiously and benefits of reductions in interest rates passed on to
the borrowers.
     (iii) Lending by banks to NBFCs
With a view to further enhancing the credit flow to SSI sector, it is proposed
that:
• All new loans granted by banks to NBFCs for the purpose of on lending to SSI
sector would also be reckoned under priority sector lending.
8(b) Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit to Agriculture and Related
Activities
Considering the importance of agriculture sector in the economy and in order
to progress further in meeting the credit needs of this sector, Governor proposed to
constitute an Advisory Committee to suggest short-term and medium-term measures
to enhance credit flow to this sector. While assessing the progress made in the
implementation of Vyas Committee, the Committee would, inter alia, look into the
role of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development ( NABARD) in the
development of the sector; the present structure and deployment of rural infrastructure
development fund (RIDF); role of RRBs; and incentive and attitudinal aspects of
credit delivery.
(c) Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI Sector
Governor proposed to constitute a Working Group keeping in view the credit
needs of this sector, to assess the progress made in implementation of Kapur
Committee and Gupta Committee recommendations and suggest ways to improve
credit flow considering in particular the backward, forward linkages of this sector
with large corporates. The Group will also look into methods of utilisation of priority
sector short-fall deposits with SIDBI and suggest appropriate institutional
arrangement for enhancing the credit delivery on a timely basis and in adequate
measure to SSIs.
(d) Micro-finance
On the basis of the recommendations of the informal Groups on micro finance,
it is proposed that: (i) banks should provide adequate incentives to their branches in
financing the Self Help Groups (SHGs) and establish linkages with them; (ii) the
group dynamics of working of the SHGs may be left to themselves; (iii) the approach
to micro-financing of SHGs should be totally hassle-free; (iv) NABARD should
continue to reinforce its commitment to maintaining and enhancing the flow to micro-
finance while debureaucratising the process; and (v) NABARD should devise
mechanisms to ensure sharing of experiences among the bank branches that are
closely involved in extending micro-finance.
Money Market
(a) Moving towards Pure Inter-bank Call/Notice Money Market
In order to move further towards a pure inter-bank call/notice money market,
Governor proposed that:
• With effect from the fortnight beginning December 27, 2003, non-bank
participants would be allowed to lend, on average in a reporting fortnight, up
to 60 per cent of their average daily lending in call/notice money market
during 2000-01.  The time table for further phasing out of non-bank
participants will be announced in consultation with market participants.
(b) Rationalisation of Standing Facilities
9In order to move further towards phasing out sector-specific standing facilities
as also to rationalise the rates at which liquidity is injected into the system, Governor
proposed that:
• The “normal” and “back-stop” standing facilities will be available in a ratio of
one-third to two-thirds (33:67) from the fortnight beginning December 27,
2003.
(c) Primary Dealers’ Access to Call/Notice Money Market
With a view to develop further the repo market as also to ensure a balanced
development of various segments of money market, Governor proposed that:
• With effect from February 7, 2004, PDs will be allowed to borrow, on average
basis  in a reporting fortnight, upto 200 per cent of their net owned funds
(NOF) as at end-March of preceding financial year.
(d) Reporting of Call/Notice Money Market Transactions on NDS
Platform
Though, there has been significant increase in the reporting of deals on NDS
platform, Governor observed that complete dissemination of trade information
relating to money, government securities and foreign exchange markets will improve
transparency and strengthen efficiency of the market.  In this direction, all NDS
members should report their deals as soon as the deals are concluded.
Foreign Exchange Market
(a) Unhedged Forex Exposures of Corporates
Governor explained possible implications of the un-hedged foreign currency
borrowings by corporates for the quality of banks’ assets.  In view of this, all foreign
currency loans by banks above US $ 10 million, can be extended only on the basis of
a well laid out policy of the Board on hedging, except in following cases:
• Where forex loans are extended to finance exports, banks may not insist on
hedging but assure themselves that such customers have uncovered receivables
to cover the loan amount.
• Where the forex loans are extended for meeting forex expenditure.
(b) Export Follow-up
Governor proposed that beginning January 1, 2004, all exporters may write off
outstanding export dues on their own and may also extend the normal period of
realisation beyond 180 days on their own provided the aggregate value of such write
off and delay in realisation does not exceed 10 per cent of their export proceeds in a
calendar year.
10Sale of Government Securities – Relaxation
Governor observed that at present, no sale transaction in a government security is
permitted without the seller actually holding the security in its portfolio. In order to
facilitate deepening of the government securities market, it is proposed that sale of a
government security, already contracted for purchase, would be permitted, provided,
such purchase contract was either guaranteed by an approved central counterparty like
CCIL or the counterparty thereof was RBI. To facilitate operationalisation of the
proposal, the settlement of government securities transactions would be switched over
to the DVP III mode. He proposed to review the working of the above arrangements
every month to consider modifications and continuance, as appropriate.
Prudential Measures
(a) Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR)
Governor reviewed the status of provisions made by banks for IFR, and said
that although banks have time to achieve the stipulated 5.0 per cent, they should
quickly build up IFR so that they are better positioned to meet interest rate risks.
(b) Prudential Norms for FIs
In order to bring in convergence between the asset classification norms of FIs
and banks, in line with international norms, it is proposed:
• To adopt the 90 days norm for recognition of loan impairment for FIs with
effect from the year ending March 31, 2006.  However, in order to mitigate the
burden of additional provisioning arising out of adoption of the revised norm,
FIs are permitted to phase out the required provisioning over a period of three
years beginning from the year ending March 31, 2006, with a minimum of one
fourth of the additional provisioning being made each year.
(c) Standing Technical Advisory Committee on Financial Regulation
Governor said that the financial sector now faces increasing challenges and
complexities in the context of globalisation and risk management.  In order to
strengthen the consultative process and to place such a process on a continuing basis,
Governor proposed to constitute a Standing Technical Advisory Committee on
Financial Regulation on similar lines as the RBI Technical Advisory Committee on
Money and Government Securities Markets (TAC). The Committee would consist of
experts drawn from academia, financial markets, banks, non-bank financial
institutions and credit rating agencies. The Committee would examine the issues
referred to it and advise RBI on regulations on an on-going basis covering banks and
non-bank financial institutions and other market participants, in addition to the
existing channels of consultations.
(d) Monitoring of Systemically Important Financial Intermediaries  (SIFIs)
In consultation with the Chairman, SEBI and Chairman, IRDA, Governor
proposed to establish a special monitoring system for Systemically Important
Financial Intermediaries (SIFIs) that would encompass (i) a reporting system on
11financial matters of common interest to RBI, SEBI and IRDA; (ii) the reporting of
intra-group transactions; and (iii) the exchange of relevant information among RBI,
SEBI and IRDA. It has been agreed that, after co-opting a member from IRDA, the
present RBI-SEBI Technical Committee would propose a list of SIFIs and advise on a
reporting system in a time-bound manner over the next three months.
(e) Standing Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public
Services
In order to review the current level of public service provided by the Reserve
Bank, and to suggest appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an ongoing basis,
Governor proposed to set up a Standing Committee: (i) to undertake procedure and
performance audit on public services and regulatory clearances in RBI, (ii) advise and
coordinate with the Ad hoc Committees on Customer Services to be set up by banks.
The Standing Committee will submit an annual report to RBI on its work to be placed
before the Board of RBI.
(f) Committees on Procedures and Performance Audit on Customer Services
in Banks
In order to support broad-based improvement in customer services in relation
to various banking services, Governor advised each commercial bank to constitute an
Ad hoc Committee to undertake procedures and performance audit on public services
rendered by the bank. Each Ad hoc committee is expected to complete its work in six
months from the date of constitution.
(g) Working Group on Development Finance Institutions
Governor observed that ICICI has completed the process of transition to a
bank and IDBI is in the process of doing so. In order to address the regulatory and
supervisory issues relating to remaining term lending institutions and refinancing
institutions and for improving the flow of resources to them, Governor proposed to set
up a Working Group on Development Finance Institutions. The Group would
examine, within the broader framework of regulation of NBFCs, various regulatory
and supervisory aspects, including access to short-term resources for the DFIs as a
separate category, and submit its report in four months.
(h) Corporate Governance
Governor proposed, through a consultative process, to: (i) harmonise the
approaches suggested by the Ganguly Committee and the SEBI Committee in regard
to corporate governance of banks, and (ii) extend the above principles of good
corporate governance practices to PDs, NBFCs and other financial institutions, as
appropriate.
Technology Upgradation
Governor noted the pivotal role played by RBI in the upgradation of
technology in the banking sector and indicated that the national settlement system
(NSS) is expected to be operational by June 2004, which would integrate the
segmented clearing and settlement infrastructure in the country and enable more
effective funds management by banks.
12(a) Implementation of RTGS
Governor said that RBI has commenced implementation of a RTGS system in
a phased manner.  A fully functional RTGS system is expected to be made operational
by June 2004. This system would be fully integrated with the integrated accounting
system of RBI. Governor urged banks and PDs to ensure complete readiness in terms
of infrastructure, systems and procedures, and adequate trained manpower to
effectively participate in the RTGS system.  He added that banks should put in place
necessary connectivity between their branches and the payment system gateway
through which banks will interact with the RTGS system.
(b) Intra-day Liquidity under RTGS
With the commencement of RTGS, the likely increase in requirement of intra-
day funds would necessitate provision of intra-day liquidity (IDL) to participants for a
smooth and timely settlement process. The Reserve Bank would be providing
collateralised repo based intra-day liquidity support to the participants. Governor
advised the market participants to devise strategies for efficient cash flow
management.
Central Database Management System
The Reserve Bank has established a Central Database Management System
(CDBMS) available for access and analysis to users in RBI since December 2002.
Governor proposed to place the relevant data in the CDBMS in the public domain.
Accordingly, an Expert Group is being constituted to guide this process, particularly
through an assessment of user requirements. It is expected that these data would
become available on-line to researchers and users by end-June 2004.
Conduct of Government Business
(a) Enhancement in Agency Arrangement
Hitherto, public sector banks were authorised to undertake government
business as agents of RBI.  In order to provide a wider network for public
convenience and timely conduct of government business, four private sector banks
were authorised to handle government transactions such as revenue collection,
pension payments and expenditure related functions of all Central Government
Ministries/Departments with effect from October 1, 2003
(b) On-line Tax Administration System
At the request of the Central Board of Direct Taxes ( CBDT), RBI has
constituted a High Powered Committee for operationalising an On-line Tax
Administration System (OLTAS).  A decision has also been taken to pay tax refunds
through the electronic clearing services (ECS) to assessees in select cities where
banks presently offer this facility. To begin with, as a pilot project, tax refunds upto
Rs 25, 000 are proposed to be made through the ECS to the beneficiaries in these
select cities.
13Developments in Currency Management
As indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2003, the Clean Note
Policy adopted by RBI was further facilitated by special measures and mechanisation
of note processing activity in all the Issue Offices of RBI.  In order to support the
system for handling notes in a de-stapled condition, banks were advised to provide
necessary infrastructure like note banding machines and note counting/sorting
machines.  In addition, RBI has also adopted an innovative procedure of using Post
Offices for distribution of coins.
Reserve Bank accords a very high value to the convenience of common
person. While the phenomenal progress made in the recent period by banks is
appreciated, Governor urged further progress in this regard, as a collaborative effort
between RBI and banks.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-04/580
14