RBI discusses Micro finance Issues with Bankers
August 7, 2003
Micro finance institutions have expanded the frontiers of institutional finance and
have brought the poor, especially poor women, into the formal financial system and enabled
them to access credit and fight poverty. Though some significant strides have been made in
this regard, it is observed that microfinance has had an uneven growth across the country with
diverse rates of interest being charged to the members, which was an area of concern.
As the central bank of the country, it has been the Reserve Bank of India's endeavour
to foster an enabling environment for the growth and development of the sector. The sector
now covers over 7 lakh self help groups enjoying bank credit to the tune of over Rs. 2000
crore. In order to enable further growth and development of micro finance institutions,
however, it was necessary to identify policy measures relating to micro finance delivery.  The
Reserve Bank had, in October 2002, constituted four informal groups to further stimulate the
process of constructive dialogue amongst the major players in the area of micro finance.  The
four groups studied issues relating to: (i) Structure and Sustainability; (ii) Funding; (iii)
Regulations; and (iv) Capacity Building.
Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India chaired a high level
meeting to discuss the recommendations of the groups on August 6, 2003. The meeting was
attended by Chairmen of Indian Bank and United Bank of India, Chairman and Managing
Director, Small Industries Development Bank of India and senior executives of State Bank of
India, select public sector and private sector banks, Regional Rural Banks, District Central
Cooperative Banks, micro finance institutions, SIDBI and National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development.
After a detailed discussion, the Deputy Governor stated that the issues raised in the
discussion required further examination. He suggested that greater public debate was required
before a view could be taken, particularly on regulatory issues. The Reserve Bank would
circulate the reports of the groups among all banks and elicit their responses within a month.
Thereafter the Reserve Bank would segment the recommendations in three groups (i) those
which are implementable readily by banks (ii) those which are difficult to implement and
need further study and (iii) areas which need further examination, including legal aspects.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/181