Government, RBI and banks call for concerted efforts to boost SSI growth
June 5, 2003
A coordinated and concerted approach by the bankers, Central Government, State
Governments and other agencies involved in development of small scale industries (SSIs)
was necessary to ensure growth in finance to viable SSI units and to prevent further increase
of non-performing assets in this segment. Measures, such as, banks setting up their own
credit targets for SSIs, doubling the limits for composite loans and special measures to be
taken by the Government to enable SSIs to set up units in a cost effective manner were also
suggested at a meeting held on June 2, 2003 to review the implementation of the action points
on the third meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee on SSIs.
The review meeting was held at the Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai
under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor Shri Vepa Kamesam. It was attended by the
Secretary, Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Additional Development Commissioner,
Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Government of India, Chairmen and Managing
Directors/Executive Directors of major public sector banks, Small Industries Development
Bank of India and National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development. Earlier, on
January 15, 2003 the Standing Advisory Committee to review flow of Institutional credit to
small scale industries (SSI) sector had met and had decided on some action points.
During the review meeting it was generally agreed that banks would fix self-set
targets for advances to SSI sector keeping in view the outstanding credit to this sector, the
previous year’s achievement and overall trends in growth of net bank credit. Banks would
advise their targets to the Reserve Bank of India. In order to meet the term loan and the
working capital requirements of SSIs, the banks present in the meeting were also agreeable to
enhance, on merits, the limit for composite loan from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh on usual
terms.
Further, several banks felt that the procedure for creation of charge on fixed assets of
SSI units should be considerably simplified, especially where such assets were already
charged to State Finance Corporations/State Industrial Development Centers.
To disseminate information regarding the 60 category `A’ clusters identified by the
Government of India for focussed development of SSI sector, it was agreed that the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries, Government of India would convey these to the Reserve Bank
which in turn would disseminate this information to all the banks for initiating further
necessary action. The State Level Bankers’ Committees would also be advised the details of
these clusters for incorporation in the State Level Credit Plans apart from putting these details
on the web site of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Government of India
(www.ssi.nic.in). Availability of this information would enable the banks to identify units for
financing on their own. Recognising the need to reduce the initial costs for setting up small-
scale units, the Central Government and the State Governments would provide facilities in
these clusters. It was decided to review the progress made towards the end of the year.
P. V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release No.- 2002-03/1245