RBI Governor inaugurates CVPS in Mumbai
February 4, 2003
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today inaugurated the Currency
Verification and Processing System (CVPS) in Mumbai Office of the Reserve Bank of India.
The currency verification and processing systems have been installed in the Reserve Bank
offices for faster and secured processing of soiled currency notes. Weeding out soiled
currency notes and replacing them with fresh ones are part of the Clean Note Policy being
followed by the Reserve Bank of India over the past two years. So far the Reserve Bank has
installed 42 CVPS at its various Issue Offices to supplement the manual processing of notes.
Each CVPS is capable of processing 50,000 - 60,000 notes per hour. It counts, examines the
genuiness of notes, sorts notes into fit and unfit and destroys the unfit notes on-line. The
shreds are on-line transported to a separate briquetting system where they are compressed
into briquettes of small size.  The system is also environment-friendly, as it does not create
pollution that was created by burning of notes in the past.  The briquettes can be used as
residual fuel in industrial furnaces. They can even be used for land fillings or for making
items for use at office and home and paperboard.
Apart from weeding out soiled notes from circulation, the Reserve Bank has also taken
measures to supply adequate quantities of fresh notes and preventing excessive soilage of the
existing currency notes.
Clean Note Policy
While speaking at the inaugural function, Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve
Bank of India, urged the banks and the members of public to help the Reserve Bank in its
pursuit of the Clean Note Policy by not stapling the currency notes.  Pointing out that a major
factor for soilage and mutilation of notes was stapling and multiple stapling of notes/note
packets, the Deputy Governor stated that members of public too had been resenting multiple
stapling of notes. The Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India, therefore, decided
to do away the practice of stapling of notes. The practice of non-stapling of fresh notes was
initiated in 1996 and now the fresh notes supplied by the notes printing presses are totally in
unstapled condition, he added. Moreover, non-stapling of notes facilitates proper sorting of
notes at bank branches by using table-top sorting machines, as also, mechanised processing at
the CVPS.  The note packets are secured by paper/polythene bands and both banks and public
need to accept the change to paper/polythene bands and move away from staple pins.
With the CVPSs, the capacity of the Reserve Bank of India for disposal of soiled notes has
considerably increased. The increased capacity would help in the faster withdrawal of soiled
notes from circulation. By simultaneously pumping in fresh notes in circulation with the help
of additional capacity of two currency printing presses of the Reserve Bank, the demand for
fresh notes of the public is expected to be adequately met.
It may be noted that Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India announced 'Clean
Note Policy' in January 1999. For effective execution of 'Clean Note Policy' withdrawing
soiled notes from circulation is as important as pumping fresh notes into circulation. For the
achievement of the twin-goal, the Reserve Bank has, over the past two years, introduced
various changes in the systems and procedures related to currency management. The steps
include mechanisation of the currency verification and processing as also shredding and
briquetting for destruction of soiled and mutilated notes.2
Towards implementation of clean note policy, the Reserve Bank has issued a public interest
directive to all banks instructing them:
? Not to staple bank notes,
? To tender soiled notes to the Reserve Bank in unstapled condition,
? To use bands instead of staple pins,
? To issue only clean notes to members of public,
? To open select currency chest branches on Sundays to provide exchange facility to
members of public all over the country,
? To provide unrestricted facility for exchange of soiled and mutilated notes to
members of public.
The Reserve Bank has also urged members of public not to write on the currency notes and
deface them.
Interestingly, the Reserve Bank occasionally also arranges to collect soiled and mutilated
notes from public by going to market places. Mobile vans are periodically sent to supply
coins in various parts of towns. As a result, the number of public complaints in respect of
soiled notes in circulation have considerably declined and availability of fresh notes has
significantly improved.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2002-03/819