India should be the Strongest in External Sector:Bimal Jalan
September 5, 2003
The Indian rupee should become as good a currency as the dollar or the yen or the pound
sterling or the euro and India should be the strongest in external sector. Dr. Bimal Jalan,
Governor, Reserve Bank of India, expressed this hope in his last public appearance as the
Governor of the Reserve Bank. He was inaugurating the annual conference of authorised
dealers and chiefs of international banking divisions in the Reserve Bank of India held on
September 4 in Mumbai.
Reflecting upon his tenure at the Reserve Bank of India, he stated that foreign
exchange was now not a constraint at all.  Strong external position of the country had many
dimensions. It gave a sense of security and confidence to the entire country. This was
achieved through sheer professionalism and collectivity in decision-making at the Reserve
Bank of India. Wider consultation without hierarchical barriers enabled emergence of
decisions which were the result of continuous dialogue and discussions.   "There are files that
move in the process but the files are there more for accountability and record keeping," he
added. He also appreciated the excellent professional inputs provided by the staff of the
Reserve Bank of India.
The Governor further stated that it was important for the Central Bank especially in
emerging markets to be in harmony with the Government of the day for economic policy
making. It is important to have shared objectives between the central bank and the
government though the instrumentalities of achieving those objectives may be different, he
noted. He acknowledged the whole-hearted support received by the Reserve Bank of India
from the Government on matters of strategy.
Complimenting the market for giving feedback on longer term polices to the Reserve
Bank, the Governor stated that market feedback on longer term policy issues have always
helped the Reserve Bank of India in framing policies that are market friendly and can be
implemented. He hoped that India will continue to build transparent, well functioning and
forward looking markets. Pointing out that policies, such as, prescribing limits on certain
transactions are towards building a safety net. Such policies help in times of crisis, he stated
that they should not be used to make individual transactions difficult. He urged the bankers
and the policy makers to get out of the hangover of FERA. "While accountability is
necessary, it is not necessary to mistrust Indians" he said and added that bankers should
implement the 'know your customer' principle while entering into transactions but should
always give the benefit of doubt to the customer.
Smt. K.J.Udeshi, Deputy Governor, in her address stressed upon reaching the
liberalisation in foreign exchange regulations to the grassroot level. She also cautioned the
bankers about the increasing global regulatory concern about money laundering. She urged
the bankers to apply the 'know your customer' principle to customer transactions especially in
NOSTRO accounts.
Deputy Governor, Shri Vepa Kamesam, in his keynote address focused on two issues
- technology and customer service.  He commended the banks for whole heartedly
implementing the clean note policy and reiterated the Reserve Bank of India's resolve to give
clean good notes and clean good coins to the members of public. Drawing attention of thebanks towards the Reserve Bank's efforts in implementing the real time gross settlement
system, he urged the authorised dealers to ensure connectivity among all authorised dealer
branches and use the technology to facilitate customer transactions. He urged the bankers and
their customers to review their unhedged position and underlined the need for better
management of risks. Shri Kamesam also stressed on the need for following proper
accounting processes and good record keeping practices and asked banks to properly
maintain and reconcile the NOSTRO accounts. He highlighted the need for keeping audit
trails and market intelligence to guard against possible money laundering transactions which
was a major concern among global regulators.
The conference reviewed, among other things, implementation of FEMA. An outline
of an integrated forex management system proposed by the Reserve Bank for linking
corporates, authorised dealers and the Reserve Bank to manage the foreign exchange
transactions from application to data collection was also shared as authorised dealers have a
much greater role in day-to-day disposal of customers.
The authorised dealers conference was followed by a conference of the Exchange
Control Departments of regional offices of the Reserve Bank of India. The emphasis of this
conference was on eliminating the need for customers to go to the Reserve Bank for small
transactions and streamlining the procedures accordingly. It was also decided to give
publicity to the foreign exchange facilities available to individual residents and non resident
Indians.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2003-2004/322