Report of the Working Group on Rupee Derivatives
January 31, 2003
Following the announcement in the mid-term Review for the year 2002-03, RBI had
constituted a Working Group on Rupee Derivatives under the Chairmanship of Shri
Jaspal Bindra, Chief Executive Officer, India Region, Standard Chartered Bank on
November 7, 2002.   The Group had appropriate representations from banks, Primary
Dealers, mutual funds and the Reserve Bank of India.   The terms of reference of the
Group were:
• To suggest the modalities for the introduction of dealing in derivatives having
explicit/implicit option features such as caps/floors/collars in the rupee
derivatives segment.
• To suggest norms for capital adequacy, exposure limits, swap position, asset-
liability management, internal control and other risk management methods for
these derivatives.
The scope of the Group was expanded to cover the issues relating to exchange-traded
interest rate derivatives on the recommendation of the High Level Committee on
Capital Market (HLCC). The Group submitted its Report to Dr. Rakesh Mohan,
Deputy Governor.
The Working Group explored the possibilities of expanding the over-the-counter
(OTC) rupee derivatives market in India in order to further deepen the money market
and enable market participants to manage and control interest rate risk.  The Group
also considered introduction of exchange-traded interest rate derivatives in India for
better hedging of risk as also to encourage wider participation in derivatives market.
The Group focussed on such related issues as legality, netting, documentation,
accounting and valuation procedures for interest rate options.  It has also laid down
various considerations governing Board policies, risk management system and
regulatory requirement. The major recommendations of the Group are as follows:
• Less complex interest rate options to be permitted in the first phase include vanilla
caps, floors and collars, European Swaptions, call and put options on fixed income
instruments/benchmark rates and unleveraged structured swaps based on overnight
indexed swaps (OIS) and FRAs where the risk profile of such structure is similar to
that of the building blocks.
• Scheduled commercial banks, financial institutions and primary dealers should be
allowed to both buy and sell options; corporates may sell options initially without
being the net receivers of premium.   Mutual funds and insurance companies may
also write options as and when their respective regulators allow them.
• Four contracts, viz., a) Short-term MIBOR Futures Contracts, b) MIFOR Futures
Contract, c) Bond Futures Contract and d) Long-term Bond Index Futures Contract
could be considered for trading on exchanges at this stage. Of them, Bond Futures
Contract could be launched where settlement should be done on the basis of delivery
of securities. On other contracts, settlement could be done on cash basis.
• Market regulator should lay down only broad eligibility criteria and the Exchanges
should be free to decide on the underlying stocks and indices on which futures and
options could be permitted.
• Netting should be allowed on intra-day basis at client level positions.• RBI may consider mandatory anonymous disclosure of deals done in a standardised
manner on the negotiated dealing system platform.
• Brokers accredited by FIMMDA may be permitted in OTC derivatives market.
• SEBI may consider issuing guidelines in regard to derivative products that MFs can
trade in. IRDA should come out with guidelines for participation of insurance
companies in derivatives market.
• To make the OTC derivatives contracts legally enforceable, amendment to Section
18A of the SCRA, 1956 may be followed up vigorously with the Ministry of
Finance by RBI.  To clarify the status of derivatives contracts in India undertaken by
banks/FIs/PDs, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 may be amended.
• A centralised clearing system for OTC derivatives may be introduced through CCIL.
A draft legislation on netting that has been forwarded to the Government by RBI
should incorporate netting of derivative contracts.  Till such time as the netting
legislation is passed, bilateral netting by novation, on similar lines as done by
FEDAI for foreign exchange contracts, may be operationalised by FIMMDA for the
derivatives market.
• OTC derivatives contracts should be governed by an approved ISDA Master
agreement executed between two Indian counterparties who would be free to choose
the governing law to be Indian Law or otherwise.
• Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) may be approached to lay down
detailed accounting and disclosure guidelines for derivative transactions in line with
the principles put forth under Financial Accounting Standard (FAS) 133 and
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 39.
• Credit conversion factors on the purchased options as laid down by the RBI vide its
circular dated December 13, 2002, may be used to compute the capital adequacy.
• Derivative dealers can choose the pricing and valuation model for interest rate
options according to their opinion on the suitability of the models.
• FIMMDA should publish the prices to be used by banks/PDs/FIs for the valuation
after polling and it should also publish the volatilities using a suitable model.
• A common minimum information framework and a public disclosure system may be
adopted by market participants.
Further action on the Report will be taken by the Reserve Bank of India in
consultation with SEBI and other relevant agencies.  The full Report is available on
the RBI website ( www.rbi.org.in).  Views, comments and suggestions on the
recommendations of the Group could be forwarded to Adviser-in Charge, Monetary
Policy Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai 400 001 (e-mail:
helpmpd@rbi.org.in).