RBI sets up a Committee on Procedures and
Performance Audit of Public Services
December 23, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India has set up a Committee on Procedures and Performance
Audit on Public Services.  Set up under the chairmanship of  Dr. S.S. Tarapore, Chairman,
Discount and Finance House of India Ltd., the other members of the Committee are Shri M.
G. Bhide, Director, CRISIL,   Shri H. N. Sinor, Chief Executive, Indian Banks' Association,
Shri C.B. Bhave, Managing Director, National Securities Depository Ltd. and Shri M.M.
Chitale, Chartered Accountant.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
2003-2004 announced on November 3, 2003, it was indicated that the Reserve Bank of India
would set up a Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit in order to benchmark the
current level of its services rendered to the public. Accordingly, the Committee will, among
other things, advise the Reserve Bank of India on improving the quality of its services to
common people and institutions and to benchmark such services in terms of quality of
timeliness. The Committee will review the existing policies and procedures followed by the
Reserve Bank of India with a view to rationalising and simplifying them and to suggesting
appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an ongoing basis. The Committee will also
undertake performance audit on public services and regulatory clearances in the Reserve
Bank. The Committee will co-ordinate, with the Ad-hoc Committees on Customer Services
of banks, will consider and make recommendations on the suggestions made by these
Committees.
The Committee is authorised to associate any other person as a special invitee and
will initially function for a period of one year from January 1, 2004. The Committee will
present its report to the Reserve Bank once in a quarter. The secretarial services to the
Committee will be provided by the Reserve Bank's Department of Government and Bank
Accounts.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 2003-2004/769