Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers:
Monsoon And Winter 2000 Issue
January 13, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India today released the combined Monsoon and Winter
2000 issue of its Occasional Papers. The Occasional Papers is the research journal of
the Reserve Bank. It contains contributions of the Reserve Bank’s staff and reflects
the views of the authors. This combined Monsoon and Winter 2000 issue covers some
important themes which are at the forefront of discussions worldwide.
The first paper entitled “The Price of Low Inflation” by Muneesh Kapur and
Michael Debabrata Patra argues that any society that desires to lower inflation rate
may suffer output losses in the interim period. These output losses may arise on
account of nominal and real rigidities in the system or on account of misperceptions
of economic agents in distinguishing relative from aggregate price changes. A review
of the literature reveals that even independent central banks may have to undergo such
output losses, given the inertia in inflation expectations and doubts about the
credibility. While presenting estimates of sacrifice ratio for India which turn out to be
in a wide range based on alternative short-run aggregate supply specifications, a
feature consistent with empirical studies on the subject, the paper points out that the
slope of the aggregate supply curve in India is flattening and may raise the output
costs of reining in inflation when the upturn of overall economic activity takes root. A
low inflation regime may have continuous benefits which may be enough to offset the
initial output losses. The paper highlights that the concept of sacrifice ratio argues
neither the case for high inflation nor for low inflation and is in no way inconsistent
with the views favouring a lower inflation rate in the economy. Moreover, the
estimated sacrifice ratio warrants a number of caveats in its analytical interpretation.
The output losses refer to cumulative output losses spread over a number of years
associated with decline in trend inflation and not episodic fluctuations. The relevant
rate of inflation used in the computation is the average annual rate of inflation. It is
also crucial to understand the dynamics and sources of inflation.
Identification of business cycles in India and construction of a composite
leading indicator for forecasting the cyclical turning points is the focus of the second
paper entitled “Business Cycles and Leading Indicators of Industrial Activity in
India” by Jaya Mohanty, Bhupal Singh and Rajeev Jain. The cyclical analysis of
monthly index of industrial production (IIP) in India indicates that there have been 13
growth cycles in the Indian economy with varying durations during 1970-71 to 2001-
02. While the average duration of expansion has been 12 months, the recessions are
characterised by relatively longer duration of 16 months. This is in contrast to the
general proposition that expansionary phase in the business cycle is larger than the
contractionary phase.  In the earlier decade, periodic crop failures and consequent
adverse demand shocks emanating from the agricultural sector were mainly
responsible for longer recessionary phase; slowdown in public investment and
growing infrastructural constraint also seem to have been the binding constraint on
sustaining the expansionary phase of the growth cycle in the economy in recent
decades. For the purpose of forecasting turning points of business cycle, a composite
leading index (CLI) is constructed comprising non-oil imports, exports, US GDP,
deposits of commercial banks, non-food credit of commercial banks, currency
demand, money supply growth, prices of industrial raw materials, prices of
manufactured products, treasury bill yield, stock prices, freight loading of the railways
and cargo handled at the major ports. The CLI has been able to forecast the turning
points of the reference series with a lead period of about 6 months.2
The third paper entitled “Government Deficit and
Inflation in India” by A. Prasad and Jeevan Kumar Khundrakpam finds that during
the period 1951-52 to 1999-2000 government deficit has been an important cause for
long-run inflationary trend in India. Fiscal consolidation, therefore, appears to be a
key requirement for long lasting price stability. The study also shows that rise in oil
prices adds to inflationary impact. The study, however, suggests that there is an
optimal level of monetisation for a given level of government deficit and refutes the
concern that monetisation of deficit is always inflationary. This is not to suggest in
any way that there is more scope to finance government deficit through monetisation.
The study also indicates that excessive monetisation of deficit also leads to higher
inflation. With the increase in capital inflows on which there is certain degree of lack
of control and the consequent predominance of net foreign exchange assets in reserve
money, the paper cautions that there is a need for greater fiscal restraint as well as
monetary-fiscal coordination.
The fourth paper entitled “Anatomy of Liquidity Management” by Indranil
Sen Gupta, Indranil Bhattacharya, Satyananda Sahoo and Siddhartha Sanyal
formalises the partition of the sources of primary  liquidity in the Indian context into
the emerging reserve concepts of autonomous (AL) and discretionary liquidity (DL).
Recent research has attempted to assess liquidity conditions in the market for bank
reserves in terms of central bank balance sheet flows. The paper finds that there is a
systemic response in the Reserve Bank’s discretionary liquidity operations to the
‘autonomous’ shocks to the bank reserves market. The The AL-DL framework
provides a reasonably good analytical framework for mapping the interaction of the
central bank and other banks in the market for bank reserves.
Exploring the relationship between the gross domestic product and stock of
infrastructural services in India by estimating a vector autoregressive (VAR) model
for the period 1970-71 to 2000-01, the paper entitled “Infrastructure and Economic
Growth: An Empirical Examination” by Satyananda Sahoo highlights that though
the initial impact of increase in the stocks of infrastructure on real output is
diminishing, it has a very positive impact in the medium-to-long run. Various stocks
of infrastructure viz., transport, electricity, gas, water supply and communication
facilities are included as inputs in the model whereas gross domestic product is
considered as output in a Cobb-Douglas production function framework.  Among all
the infrastructural sectors, electricity, gas, water supply and communication sectors
play a key role in explaining the movements in the real GDP. Recognising the
importance of infrastructure in fostering growth, the paper points out that the major
concern for the policy makers should be to remove the bottlenecks in supply.
In the section on special notes, the paper entitled “Insurance: The Indian
Experience” by Achamma Samuel undertakes an overview of the insurance system in
India. The paper also attempts to evaluate the insurance penetration achieved in the
country as compared to world standards and traces future scope for this sector as a
facilitator for economic and financial development of the country. The second paper
in this section entitled “Delay and Cost Escalation in Central Public Sector
Projects” by R.K. Jain analyses time and cost overruns, typical implementation
period and factors responsible for delay in large public sector projects in various
sectors in India.
The publication is available on our website -  www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager3
Press Release: 2002-2003/734