Public should be made aware of their Rights
vis-à-vis Banks : RBI Deputy Governor
December 5, 2003
An information portal on banking and finance could render a sterling service to the
bankers and the public by disseminating information relating to the implementation of the
Fair Practices Code. "Making aware public of their rights vis-à-vis banks as enshrined in the
Code as also making the public knowledgeable about the performance and practices in banks
which are not in consonance with fair practices would itself be the best form of community
service that could be rendered by the information portal," Smt. Udeshi stated. Smt. K.J.
Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India was inaugurating the information portal
being set up by the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance here today.
Stressing the importance of reaching banking information to over 7.5 lakh bank
employees spread over far and wide all over the country, Smt. Udeshi said that the quality of
bank services can be as good only as the quality of their human resources. Keeping them
informed of all developments and imparting training to them was therefore the most
important and challenging. Information technology, with all its delivery channels, has made
the task of imparting training and knowledge to banking community feasible.
Urging the IIBF to consider using the portal for disseminating information relating to
the implementation of the Fair Practices Code to the general public, the Deputy Governor
stated that the communication with bankers and the public must be very simple, clear, concise
and timely. "Timeliness in fact, would be very important since here, the objective is to
provide information on a daily basis and one ought to remember that falsehoods and rumours
can travel round the world before truth can even get its boots on", she stated. She hoped that
the portal would benefit both, banking students in enriching their skills and the public in
knowing their rights.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release:2003-2004/702