Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers: Summer, Monsoon and Winter 2001 Issue
June 16, 2003
The Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers is the research journal of the Bank. It
contains contributions of the Bank’s Staff and reflects the views of the authors. The
combined Summer, Monsoon and Winter 2001 issue is being released today. This issue is
woven around some important themes which are at the forefront of discussions worldwide. It
contains a rich fare of articles, special notes and book reviews.
The first paper entitled “The Relationship Between Risk and Capital:  Evidence from
Indian Public Sector Banks” by Abhiman Das and Saibal Ghosh investigates the relationship
between changes in risk and capital in the public sector banking system in India, using both
the seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) and the two stage least square (2SLS) method of
estimation. Empirical findings establish a negative and significant impact of size on capital,
indicating that large banks increased their ratio of capital to risk weighted assets less than
other banks. Regulatory pressure is also found to have a negative and significant impact on
the ratio of capital to risk weighted assets. Ceteris paribus, adequately capitalised banks
decrease their capital ratio more prominently than other banks. The results establish that risk
exposure and capital levels are simultaneously related, and that the majority of banks mitigate
the effects of increases in capital by decreasing asset risk posture, and vice versa.
The paper by Sitikantha Pattanaik and Satyananda Sahoo on “The Effectiveness of
Intervention in India: An Empirical Assessment”  suggests that  intervention operations  of
the Reserve Bank have been effective in containing exchange rate volatility of the Rupee,
even though the degree of influence does not appear to be very strong. India’s stated
exchange rate policy fully recognises these aspects and as a result, intervention operations are
not used either for driving the exchange rate to any particular level or for keeping the
exchange rate contained within any pre-decided range of volatility. Such an intervention
strategy reflects the commitment to a market determined exchange rate regime where the
Central Bank normally does not interfere with the market dynamics as long as the range of
factors that influence the level and volatility of the exchange rate do not give rise to
disorderly conditions in the market.
Examining the co-movements of business cycle in India, Germany, Japan, UK and
USA during 1950-2000 is the focus of the third paper “International Business Cycles Beyond
G-7: The Case of India” by O. P. Mall. The paper concludes that in view of its largely closed
nature and the dominant role of the public sector especially during the early period, it is
interesting that the Indian non-agricultural output cycles have some correspondence with the
output cycles in UK and also with the USA especially in the post-1980 period. The paper also
examines the role of foreign trade, foreign investment, oil-price shocks and other global
shocks as the possible source of common linkage. It is shown that the oil-price shock is the
dominant global shock linking the economies under consideration.
The fourth paper entitled “Sustainability of Services -Led Growth: An Input Output
Analysis of the Indian Economy” by Sanjay K. Hansda addresses the sustainability of
services as also of services-led growth of the Indian economy in terms of the inter-sectoral
linkages as emanating from the input-output transactions tables for 1993-94. At the
disaggregated level, the Indian economy is found to be predominantly services-intensive with
55 per cent activities direct services-intensive and industry the most services-intensive sector.In the process, industrial activities turn out to be the major pace setter for services-growth.
On the other hand, services stand out to have the largest inducing effect on the economy as
per the Rasmussen measure of both backward and forward linkages. The results show that the
inducing impulses from services might have worked mainly through the channel of forward
linkage. However, since the forward linkage is inherently less effective than the backward
linkage, the inducing impact of services on the rest of the economy could be limited.
Nevertheless, as per the index of vertical integration, the services sector is found to have the
largest expansionary potential (multiplying effect) on the rest of the economy. Therefore, the
services-led growth augurs well for the Indian economy for sustaining the overall GDP
growth. However, since the multiplier value remains less than one for all the activities
including services, the expansionary potential of a services-led growth may not be over-
emphasised unless accompanied by growth impulses from other sources.
The fifth paper  on  “Public Sector Spending And Economic Growth In India” by
Jeevan Kumar Khundrakpam analyses the dynamic interaction between the public sector
expenditure and national income in India for the period 1960-61 to 1996-97. It finds a stable
long-run relationship between public sector expenditure and national income in India, with
the causality running strictly from the former to the latter. The study also indicates that long-
run positive impact of public sector expenditure on national income would turn adverse if the
growth of the former is excessive. In the short-run, however, there is a trade-off between
growth in public sector expenditure and income growth. Thus, though national income
growth in India seems to be investment or demand led, there is the need for maintaining a
proper balance between public sector expenditure and investment for economic growth.
The sixth paper entitled “Exchange Rate Dynamics: An Indian Perspective” by
N.K.Unnikrishnan and P.R.Ravi Mohan develops a Generalised Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedastic (GARCH) model for USD/INR exchange rate. The paper concludes that the
central bank intervention reduces volatility in the market; secondly, open market operations
in the debt market in the case of sterilised intervention reduces volatility in exchange rate;
and thirdly nominal effective exchange rate plays a dominant role on return and volatility.
In the section on special notes, the paper entitled “Who Needs the IMF as an
International Lender of Last Resort (ILOLR)” by Sitikantha Pattanaik  presents  a perspective
on why the emerging market economies need the IMF as an ILOLR in the context of the
growing international perception that the International Monetary Fund  (IMF)  cannot and
should not  function as an International Lender of Last Resort (ILOLR). The paper argues
that the risk of financial instability and associated loss of output and employment is a more
serious concern than the risk of moral hazard, and that an effective and credible ILOLR can
make the current process of globalisation less painful and disorderly. It highlights that a
transparent and financially empowered IMF can enhance the effectiveness of national Lender
of Last Resort (LOLRs)  in dealing with twin crises. It also emphasises the point that the
international initiatives on crisis prevention/resolution as part of the work programme on new
international financial architecture should not be viewed as a substitute for ILOLR. The
second special note on “Agricultural Marketing in India: Problems and Prospects” by R.K.
Jain attempts to analyse the state of present marketing system, alternative marketing options
and suggest ways to develop a vibrant agricultural marketing system in India to meet the
emerging situation. The publication is available on RBI website www.rbi.org.in
P. V. Sadanandan
ManagerPress Release : 2002-2003/1285