  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ?  
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
January 27, 2009 
Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy - Press Statement by 
Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
 "This Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy of the Reserve Bank is set in the context 
of a deteriorating global economic outlook and heightened uncertainty about the global financial 
sector. In fact, there has been a rapid and marked downturn in the global economic outlook 
since the Reserve Bank’s Mid-term Review in October 2008. The continued bad news from 
large international financial institutions on a regular basis renews concerns as to when the 
global financial sector might attain a semblance of stability.  
India has rapidly integrated into the global system and has linkages with the rest of the 
world not just through trade channels, but also through two-way movements of capital and 
finance. As an integral part of a globalising world, India cannot be expected to remain immune 
to a global crisis of this nature and magnitude; and in responding to the crisis, India has to 
share the uncertainty on the way forward just like the rest of the world.  
The Indian economy experienced a cyclical moderation in growth accompanied by high 
inflation in the first half of 2008-09. There is now distinct evidence of further slowdown as a 
consequence of the global downturn.  
The knock-on effects of the global financial crisis, economic slowdown, and falling 
commodity prices are affecting the Indian economy in several ways. Capital flow reversals 
intensified in September and October 2008 though they have stabilised since then; international 
credit channels continue to be constrained; capital market valuations remain low; industrial 
production growth has slackened; export growth has turned negative during October-November 
2008; and overall business sentiment has deteriorated. On the positive side, the headline 
inflation has decelerated, though consumer price inflation is yet to show moderation; and the 
domestic financial markets are functioning in an orderly manner. Although bank credit growth 
has been higher than during the previous year, rough calculation shows that flow of overall 
financial resources to the commercial sector in the current financial year has declined 
marginally as compared with the previous year.  This was on account of decline in other 
sources of funding such as resource mobilisation from the capital market and external 
commercial borrowings. 
Both the Government and the Reserve Bank have acted to protect the economy from 
the adverse impact of the crisis since mid-September 2008. While the Government has 
announced two major fiscal stimulus packages, the endeavour of the Reserve Bank has been 
to provide ample rupee liquidity, ensure comfortable dollar liquidity and maintain a monetary 
policy environment conducive for the continued flow of credit to productive sectors. Towards 
this endeavour, the Reserve Bank has adopted both conventional measures such as, for 
example, reduction of the cash reserve ratio (CRR), as well as unconventional measures such 
as, for example, the dollar swap facility for banks.  2
 
Measures aimed at expanding rupee liquidity included significant reduction in the CRR, 
a special repo window under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) for banks for on-lending to 
mutual funds (MFs), non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) and housing finance companies 
(HFCs), and a special refinance facility that banks can access without any collateral. The 
Reserve Bank is also unwinding the market stabilisation scheme (MSS) securities roughly 
synchronised with the government borrowing programme in order to manage liquidity. In 
addition, a special purpose vehicle (SPV) is being set up to provide liquidity support to non-
banking financial companies (NBFCs). 
Measures aimed at managing forex liquidity included upward adjustment of the interest 
rate ceilings on the foreign currency non-resident (banks) [FCNR(B)] and non-resident 
(external) rupee account [NR(E)RA] deposits, substantially relaxation of the external 
commercial borrowings (ECB) regime, allowing NBFCs/HFCs access to foreign borrowing and 
allowing corporates to buy back foreign currency convertible bonds (FCCBs) to take advantage 
of the discount in the prevailing depressed global markets. The Reserve Bank has also 
instituted a rupee-dollar swap facility for banks with overseas branches to give them comfort in 
managing their short-term funding requirements. 
Measures to encourage flow of credit to sectors which are coming under pressure 
included extending the period of pre-shipment and post-shipment credit for exports, expanding 
the refinance facility for exports, counter-cyclical adjustment of provisioning norms for all types 
of standard assets barring some exceptions, reducing risk weights on banks' exposure to 
certain sectors which had been increased earlier counter-cyclically, and expanding the lendable 
resources available to the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI),  the National 
Housing Bank (NHB) and the Export-Import (EXIM) Bank of India. 
To improve the flow of credit to productive sectors at viable costs so as to sustain the 
growth momentum, the Reserve Bank signalled a lowering of the interest rate structure by 
significantly reducing both its key policy rates — the repo rate and the reverse repo rate.  The 
statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) has also been reduced by one percentage point releasing funds to 
banks for credit deployment. 
The Government has announced setting up an SPV for addressing the temporary 
liquidity constraints of systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial 
companies (NBFCs-ND-SI). The mechanism would be as follows: The SPV would issue 
government guaranteed securities to the Reserve Bank. The SPV will, in turn, use the funds to 
acquire only investment grade commercial papers and non-convertible debentures of the 
NBFCs. During its appraisal, the SPV will ensure that the NBFCs use the money only for 
addressing liquidity constraints and not for business expansion. The total support from the 
Reserve Bank will be limited to Rs. 20,000 crore with an option to raise it by a further Rs.5,000 
crore. The facility will be available for a limited period to address current liquidity concerns of 
NBFCs. 
The several measures taken since mid-September 2008 have resulted in augmentation 
of actual/potential liquidity of over Rs.3,88,000 crore, which has significantly improved the 
liquidity condition. In addition, the permanent reduction in SLR by 1.0 per cent of NDTL has 
made available liquid funds of the order of Rs.40,000 crore for the purpose of credit expansion. 
The liquidity situation has improved significantly following several measures taken by 
the Reserve Bank. The overnight call money rate, which generally hovered above the repo rate 
during September-October 2008, has softened considerably and has moved towards the lower 
bound of the LAF corridor since early November 2008. Other money market rates have also 
softened in tandem with the overnight call money rate. The yield on 10-year government 
securities has remained below 6 per cent since mid-December 2008. The LAF window has 
been generally in an absorption mode since mid-November 2008. The liquidity problem faced 
by mutual funds appears to have eased considerably.    3
 
The Reserve Bank has acted aggressively and pre-emptively on monetary policy 
accommodation, particularly through interest rate cuts in terms of both magnitude and pace. In 
the space of just one quarter, the repo rate has been reduced from 9.0 per cent to 5.5 per cent 
and the reverse repo rate from 6.0 per cent to 4.0 per cent, thereby bringing down both of them 
to historically lowest levels. 
The transmission of the policy interest rate signal has been effective in the money and 
government securities markets; however, the transmission in the credit market has so far been 
subdued. From the real economy perspective, however, for monetary policy to have demand 
inducing effects, lending rates will have to come down. Most banks have reduced lending and 
deposit rates to some extent, but a few have yet to do so. In the Reserve Bank's view, the 
policy easing done by it in the last few months allows for considerable room for banks to 
respond more actively to the policy cues. 
The Reserve Bank has also assured market participants that it will endeavour to 
maintain the overnight money market rates within the LAF corridor.  The Reserve Bank will 
continue to pursue this stance of ensuring ample liquidity in the market and maintaining the 
overnight money market rates within the LAF corridor.  In order to do so, the Reserve Bank will, 
as in the past, employ both conventional and unconventional measures. 
The demand for credit from the banking sector has increased as other sources of funds 
to the commercial sector have shrunk. Available information (as on January 23, 2009) suggests 
that the total flow of resources to the commercial sector from all sources, estimated at about 
Rs.4,85,000 crore during the fiscal year 2008-09 so far, has been lower than about Rs.4,99,000 
crore in the corresponding period of the previous year.  While bank credit has substituted for 
the shortfall in other sources of funds to some extent, a complete substitution has so far not 
taken place.  
The Reserve Bank’s Mid-Term Review of October 2008 had estimated real GDP growth 
for 2008-09 in the range of 7.5–8.0 per cent. Since then the outlook on real GDP growth has 
been affected further and the downside risks to growth have amplified because of slowdown of 
industrial activity and weakening of external demand as reflected in decline in exports.  
Services sector activities are likely to further decelerate in the second half of 2008-09. Keeping 
in view the slowdown in industry and services and with the assumption of normal agricultural 
production, the projection of overall real GDP growth for 2008-09 is revised downwards to 7.0 
per cent with a downward bias. 
Pressures on commodity prices have abated markedly around the world reflecting slump 
in global demand. In the domestic market, inflation in terms of wholesale price index is already 
below 7.0 per cent, which was projected earlier for end-March 2009 and, as per current 
assessment, is expected to moderate further in the last quarter of 2008-09. Keeping in view the 
global trend in commodity prices and the domestic demand-supply balance, WPI inflation is 
now projected to decelerate to below 3.0 per cent by end-March 2009. 
Notwithstanding the projected decline in headline WPI inflation, it needs to be noted that 
consumer price inflation is yet to moderate and the decline in inflation expectations has not 
been commensurate with the sharp fall in WPI inflation. However, with WPI inflation having 
moderated significantly, consumer price inflation would also decline, though with a lag. Towards 
its policy endeavour of ensuring price stability with well-anchored inflation expectations, the 
Reserve Bank will take into account the behaviour of all the price indices and their components. 
Given the uncertain outlook of resource availability from both external and non-bank 
domestic sources, the Reserve Bank has raised its indicative projection of the total flow of 
credit from the banking sector to the commercial sector to 24 per cent for 2008-09 from 20 per 
cent envisaged in the Annual Policy Statement.  With a view to enabling banks to sustain the 
current level of credit flow alongside an enhanced government market borrowing programme, 
the Reserve Bank’s monetary operations will be conducted so as to be consistent with the 
revised indicative money supply projection of 19.0 per cent for 2008-09, higher than the 16.5-
17.0 per cent envisaged in the Annual Policy Statement.  4
To arrest the moderation in economic growth, it is critical that banks expand the flow of 
credit to productive sectors of the economy and do so at viable rates. At the same time, banks 
should monitor their loan portfolios and take early action to prevent delinquencies down the 
road, and safeguard the gains of last several years in improving asset quality. The Reserve 
Bank appreciates that risk management is a difficult task in normal circumstances; it is even 
more challenging in an environment of uncertainty and downturn. Towards this shared 
endeavour of maintaining the flow of credit to productive sectors, the Reserve Bank will take 
calibrated monetary policy actions as necessary and at the appropriate time. 
Although the origins of the crisis are common around the world, the crisis has impacted 
different economies differently. Importantly, in advanced economies where it originated, the 
crisis spread from the financial sector to the real sector. In emerging economies, the 
transmission of external shocks to domestic vulnerabilities has typically been from the real 
sector to the financial sector. Countries have responded to the crisis depending on their specific 
country circumstances. In particular, while policy responses in advanced economies have had 
to contend with both the financial crisis and recession, in India, the policy response has been 
predominantly driven by the need to arrest moderation in economic growth. Our ability to 
respond has been facilitated by the continued smooth functioning of our financial markets and 
the well-capitalised and healthy banking system. Thus, even as policy responses across 
countries are broadly similar, their precise design, quantum, sequencing and timing have 
varied.  This has been the case with India too. While we have certainly studied and evaluated 
measures taken by other central banks around the world, we have calibrated and designed our 
responses keeping in view India's specific economic context. 
In taking a view of the overall outlook, it should be remembered that at the heart of the 
global financial crisis lie the non-functional and frozen financial markets. In sharp contrast to 
their international counterparts, the financial system in India has been resilient and stable.  
Barring some tightness in liquidity during mid-September to early October, the money, foreign 
exchange and government securities markets have been orderly as reflected in the market 
rates, spreads and transaction volumes relative to those observed during normal times. India’s 
banking system remains healthy, well-capitalised, resilient and profitable. Credit markets have 
been functioning well and bank credit has expanded. However, bank credit expansion has not 
fully offset the shortfall in total flow of resources to the commercial sector. 
Over the last five years, India clocked around 8.8 per cent average annual growth, 
driven largely by domestic consumption and investment even as the share of net exports rose. 
While the benign global environment, easy liquidity and low interest rates helped, at the heart of 
India’s growth have been its growing entrepreneurial spirit and rise in productivity. These 
fundamental strengths continue to be in place. Nevertheless, the global crisis will dent India’s 
growth trajectory as investments and exports slow. Clearly, there is a period of painful 
adjustment ahead of us. However, once the global economy begins to recover, India’s 
turnaround will be sharper and swifter, backed by our strong fundamentals and the untapped 
growth potential. Meanwhile, the challenge for the Government and the Reserve Bank is to 
manage the adjustment with as little pain as possible.  
Based on the assessment of the global scenario and domestic economy, particularly the 
outlook on growth and inflation, the stance of monetary policy for the rest of 2008-09 will be as 
follows: 
• Provision of comfortable liquidity to meet the required credit growth consistent with the 
overall projection of economic growth. 
• Respond swiftly and effectively with all possible measures as warranted by the evolving 
global and domestic situation impinging on growth and financial stability. 
• Ensure a monetary and interest rate environment consistent with price stability, well-
anchored inflation expectations and orderly conditions in financial markets.  5
 
Given the uncertain outlook on the global crisis, it is difficult to precisely anticipate every 
development. The Reserve Bank will continue to maintain vigil, monitor domestic and global 
developments, and take swift and effective action to minimise the impact of the crisis and 
restore the economy to its potential growth path with price stability. The response to the 
Reserve Bank’s policy actions over the last several months is still unfolding. As demonstrated in 
the recent past, the Reserve Bank will act swiftly and decisively as and when evolving external 
and domestic conditions so warrant. 
Consistent with the above assessment and the monetary policy stance, it has been 
decided to maintain the policy rates and the cash reserve ratio (CRR) at the current level. Two 
liquidity facilities, viz., the special refinance facility under Section 17(3B) of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 introduced on November 1, 2008 and the special term repo facility for enabling 
banks to meet the funding requirements of MFs, NBFCs and HFCs, which are currently 
available up to June 30, 2009, have been extended up to September 30, 2009." 
 
 
G. Raghuraj 
Deputy General Manager 
Press Release : 2008-2009/1164 