 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
April 20, 2009 
Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments in 2008-09 
The Reserve Bank of India today released the document ìMacroeconomic and 
Monetary Developments in 2008-09î to serve as a backdrop to the Annual Policy 
Statement for 2009-10 being announced on April 21, 2009. 
The highlights of macroeconomic and monetary developments during 2008-09 are: 
Overview 
ï The global economic conditions deteriorated sharply during the year 2008 with 
several advanced economies experiencing their sharpest declines. The 
associated adverse shocks spread across emerging market economies (EMEs) 
particularly by the fourth quarter of the year and accentuated the synchronised 
global slowdown. 
ï Inflation conditions witnessed sharp volatility during the year as headline inflation 
in major advanced economies firmed up considerably up to July 2008, but 
declined sharply thereafter.  
ï The global financial environment entered a crisis phase in mid-September 2008, 
following the growing distress among large international financial institutions. 
ï  The knock-on effect of these unprecedented adverse global developments 
became evident in the macroeconomic performance of the Indian economy, as it 
experienced some loss of growth momentum with major drivers witnessing 
moderation. While private consumption and investment are witnessing 
moderation, the fiscal stimulus along with other committed expenditures of the 
Government could, however, arrest the moderation in growth. 
ï  An important challenge in the macroeconomic and monetary policy making during 
2008-09 has been to manage the volatility emerging in respect of several key 
economic indicators of the Indian economy. Notwithstanding several challenges, 
particularly from the global economy, the Indian economy remained relatively 
resilient, its financial institutions and private corporate sector remained sound and 
solvent. Furthermore, the macroeconomic management helped in maintaining 
lower volatility in both the financial and the real sectors in India relative to several 
other advanced and emerging market economies.  
Output  
ï The global financial crisis interrupted the growth momentum of India, despite the 
strong dominance of domestic sources of growth. There was clear moderation in 
growth by the third quarter of 2008-09. In relation to the agricultural sector, 
industry and services sectors have been affected more by the adverse external 
shocks, with some contribution to their growth deceleration arising from cyclical 
slowdown in certain sectors after a prolonged phase of high growth. 
ï The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO)'s estimates (February 2009) of real 
GDP growth was placed at 5.3 per cent during the third quarter of 2008-09 as  2
compared with 8.9 per cent during the corresponding quarter of the previous year, 
reflecting deceleration in growth of all its constituent sectors. 
ï During 2008-09, the area covered under sowing of various crops declined 
marginally during the kharif season on account of moderate shortfall in rainfall.  
On the other hand, the prospects for rabi production remain favourable with area 
sown under rabi crops being higher than a year ago. Total foodgrains production 
during 2008-09 was placed at 227.9 million tonnes (Second Advance Estimates) 
as compared with 230.8 million tonnes during 2007-08. 
ï In the wake of a near normal long range monsoon forecast of the India 
Meteorological Department (April 17, 2009) during the South-West monsoon 
season 2009, the prospects for agricultural production remain satisfactory.  
ï The loss of growth momentum in the industrial sector was evident as the year-on-
year expansion in the Index of Industrial Production was of 2.8 per cent during 
2008-09 (April-February) as against 8.8 per cent in the corresponding period of 
the previous year. The manufacturing sector and the electricity sector registered 
growth of 2.8 per cent and 2.4 per cent as compared with 9.3 per cent and 6.6 per 
cent, respectively, during the above period. 
ï  The infrastructure sector recorded growth of 3.0 per cent during 2008-09 (April-
February), down from 5.8 per cent during the corresponding period of the previous 
year, reflecting deceleration in all the sectors except coal. 
ï In the context of the severity of the impact of the crisis on the real economy of 
countries around the world, the growth outcome reflects the resilience of the 
Indian economy. 
Aggregate Demand 
ï The role of aggregate demand in a phase of weakening growth impulses came to 
the forefront of public policy in 2008-09. The sharp contraction in external demand 
- as evident in falling global output, employment and global trade ñ clearly affected 
Indiaís export performance. 
ï  Domestic demand, in the form of both private consumption and investment 
expenditure moderated, particularly in the third quarter of 2008-09. However, 
Government final consumption, however, rose on account of discretionary fiscal 
stimulus measures and committed expenditures of the Central Government. 
ï During 2008-09, the combined finances of the Central and State Governments 
were adversely impacted due to the economic slowdown. The Central 
Government finances came under stress during 2008-09, both on the revenue and 
the expenditure sides, on account of fiscal measures taken to reduce inflationary 
pressures during the first half and to arrest the moderation of economic growth in 
the second half of the year.  As a result, the key deficit indicators viz., revenue 
deficit and fiscal deficit widened to 4.4 per cent and 6.0 per cent, respectively, in 
the revised estimates for 2008-09 from 1.0 per cent and 2.5 per cent, respectively, 
in the budget estimates. 
ï The Union Interim Budget for 2009-10 has indicated the relaxation in the FRBM 
targets for 2008-09 and 2009-10, in order to ensure expansion in aggregate 
demand through fiscal stimulus measures. However, as a medium-term objective, 
it has recognised the need to revert to fiscal consolidation process at the earliest. 
ï Corporate performance remained subdued during 2008-09 with the impact on 
profitability being particularly adverse during the third quarter. 
ï  The rate of Gross Domestic Saving (GDS) peaked at 37.7 per cent GDP in 2007-
08, mainly due to improved saving performance of the private corporate and  3
public sectors. The rate of Gross Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF) also 
peaked to 39.1 per cent of GDP in 2007-08. The saving-investment balance 
widened during 2007-08 reflecting continuous surge in investment activity ahead 
of the saving rate. The slowing of economic activity in 2008-09 may, however, 
affect both saving and investment rates for the year. 
The External Economy 
ï In the face of deteriorating external environment, the adverse effects of the 
contagion transmitting through different components of India's balance of 
payments (BoP) could largely be contained through policy actions. A noteworthy 
feature during 2008-09 was that the effect of external shocks transmitting to India 
through the BoP could be contained with loss of reserves mainly in the third 
quarter of the year, when the global crisis deepened and spread significantly with 
more visible real effects. 
ï  Indiaís BoP position in 2008-09 (April-December) was characterised by a 
widened trade deficit leading to a higher current account and lower net capital 
inflows. In the face of deteriorating external environment, the adverse effects of 
the contagion transmitting through different components of India's balance of 
payments (BoP) remained largely contained. 
ï  The rapid contraction in the global trade was reflected in negative growth 
experienced during the third quarter, which was last observed in 2001-02. The 
growth in imports also decelerated to single digit level during the third quarter, led 
by lower crude oil prices and weakening domestic demand. The merchandise 
trade deficit further widened to US$ 113.8 billion during April-February 2008-09 
(US $ 82.2 billion a year ago). 
ï Net surpluses under invisibles increased in April-December 2008, primarily led by 
private transfers and software services, though a moderation in such inflows set in 
the third quarter. Thus, the current account deficit widened to a level of US$ 36.5 
billion (US$ 15.5 billion in April-December 2007) 
ï The adverse impact of the global financial market turmoil was also felt in terms of 
reduced inflow of the long and short-term debt and reversal of portfolio inflows. A 
positive development was, however, relative resilience of FDI inflows (US $ 31.7 
billion in April-February 2008-09) in the face of reversal of capital flows, reflecting 
the attractiveness of India as a long term investment destination. 
ï As on April 10, 2009, the foreign exchange reserves stood at US $ 253 billion, 
showing a decline of US$ 56.7 billion (including valuation) over the level at end-
March 2008.  
ï Indiaís external debt, debt sustainability indicators and the level of foreign 
exchange reserves continue to remain at comfortable levels and would ensure 
external stability. 
Monetary Conditions 
ï The global crisis, which  created intense uncertainties for funding liquidity in the 
face of tight market liquidity for financial instruments trading in almost all financial 
markets, brought to the fore the strong interactions between funding liquidity and 
market liquidity. As the global liquidity crisis started to affect the domestic money 
and foreign exchange markets in the last quarter of 2008, the Reserve Bank 
ensured adequate provision of both domestic and foreign exchange liquidity to the 
market through banks, with the aim of restoring normal functioning of the market, 
and thereby facilitating adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors of the 
economy.  4
ï The monetary policy stance of the Reserve Bank shifted from concerns related to 
inflation in the first half of 2008-09 to maintaining financial stability and arresting 
the moderation of growth in the second half. While money supply evolved 
consistent with indicative projections, credit to private sector reflected the 
conditions evolving in the real sector of the economy. 
ï Growth in broad money (M ), year-on-year (y-o-y), was 18.4 per cent at end-
3
March, 2009 as compared with 21.2 per cent a year ago, reflecting deceleration in 
the expansion of bank credit and capital inflows. 
ï  Aggregate deposits of banks, y-o-y, was 18.8 per cent at end-March 2009 as 
compared with 21.7 per cent a year ago.  
ï Non-food credit growth (y-o-y) of SCBs to the commercial sector remained strong 
up to October 2008 on the backdrop of drying up of other sources of funds to 
industry but witnessed sustained deceleration thereafter. Non-food credit by SCBs 
was moderated to 17.5 per cent, y-o-y, at end-March 2009 as compared with 23.0 
per cent a year ago.  
ï The contractionary impact of decline in net foreign exchange assets on reserve 
money and domestic liquidity was offset by expansion through open market 
operations (OMOs), unwinding of MSS and other measures to augment rupee 
liquidity.  Adjusted for the first round effect of the changes in CRR, reserve money 
growth (y-o-y) as on March 31, 2009 was lower at 19.0 per cent as compared with 
25.3 per cent a year ago. 
Financial Markets 
ï The process of deleveraging and dysfunctional financial markets in the advanced 
economies, which accentuated into a global financial crisis, has highlighted the 
importance of orderly functioning of markets for achieving macroeconomic 
objectives.  
ï  In the third quarter of 2008-09, when liquidity dried down in the global economy 
markets and credit markets almost froze, there were knock-on effects on domestic 
money and foreign exchange markets, which prompted the Reserve Bank to 
initiate measures to ensure adequate provision of rupee and foreign exchange 
liquidity. 
ï An important distinction  between the actions taken by the Reserve Bank and the 
other central banks is that the interaction is still largely through the banking 
channel.  Another noticeable distinction is that there has not been any dilution of 
the collateral taken by the Reserve Bank. The array of instruments available allow 
for flexibility in Reserve Bank's operations. 
ï  While orderly conditions could be restored in the money market by November 
2008, the pressure on the exchange rate continued, alongside pressure on the 
country's balance of payments and draw down of foreign exchange reserves.  The 
equity markets followed the general global sentiments and market trends and after 
a phase of sharp downward movement, the market has shown some recovery 
since March 2009. 
ï In the government securities market, reflecting the economy's need for large fiscal 
stimulus, the gross market borrowings of the Government in 2008-09 were 
substantially higher than those for 2007-08, and the entire market borrowing 
programme was managed smoothly by the Reserve Bank. 
ï In the credit market following significant reduction in policy rates by the Reserve 
Bank, the lending rates of banks have begun to exhibit some moderation.  5
ï In the context of the high volatility that was witnessed in global financial markets in 
2008-09, one notable aspect of the Indian markets was that all markets functioned 
normally, with occasional volatility for short periods. 
Price Situation 
ï The large order of volatility in the inflation outcome witnessed in India during 
2008-09 is unprecedented. The sharp volatility in international commodity prices 
largely contributed to the spiralling inflation in the first half, and then to the 
subsequent decline from a higher base at fast pace in the second half of 2008-09. 
ï In India, inflation, as measured by year-on-year variations in the Wholesale Price 
Index (WPI), reached an intra-year peak of 12.91 per cent on August 02, 2008. 
Subsequently, it fell sharply to 0.26 per cent as at end-March 2009 and further to 
0.18 per cent as on April 4, 2009. 
ï As external and supply side factors along with demand pressures conditioned the 
inflation trend during 2008-09, demand management policy measures had to be 
employed in a calibrated manner. While the first half of 2008-09 warranted for 
adjustment of aggregate demand on an economy wide basis, the sharp fall in 
inflation in the second half facilitated aggressive monetary easing, which aim at 
arresting the economic slowdown. 
ï Unlike the WPI based inflation, CPI based inflation in India, however, remains 
high, with recent evidence of very modest moderation, and the transmission 
process of lower inflation at the wholesale level to inflation at the retail level has 
emerged as an important issue in the conduct of Reserve Bank's monetary policy. 
ï Various measures of consumer price inflation, though started declining, still 
remained high in the range of 9.6-10.8 per cent during January/February 2009 as 
compared with 5.2-6.4 per cent in February 2008. 
Macroeconomic Outlook  
ï An assessment of the economic conditions at the current juncture indicates that 
the global economic conditions have deteriorated sharply during 2008 and the 
forecasts of the various international agencies point to deepening of recessionary 
conditions during 2009 as well. 
ï Reflecting global developments and their impact on the Indian economy, as well 
as domestic cyclical factors, the various surveys of economic activity point 
towards prevalence of less than optimistic sentiment for the outlook of the Indian 
economy in the coming months. The Professional Forecastersí Survey conducted 
by the Reserve Bank in December 2008 suggested moderation in economic 
activity in 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
ï The Reserve Bankís Industrial Outlook Survey of Manufacturing Companies in the 
Private Sector indicates that the business expectations indices based on the 
assessment for January-March 2009 and expectations for April-June 2009 
declined sharply by 20.7 per cent and 13.9 per cent, respectively, over the 
previous quarters.  
 
 
                           Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2008-2009/1729             Chief General Manager 