 
 
 
Date : 11 Jul 2009  
 
Finance Minister meets the Directors of the RBI Central Board 
Photograph
 The customary post-Budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India with 
the Finance Minister was held in New Delhi today. Besides Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor of the 
Reserve Bank, Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Smt. Usha Thorat and Dr. K.C. Chakravarty, 
Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank attended the meeting. The meeting was also 
attended by Shri Namo Narain Meena, Minister of State (Banking and Insurance), Shri  
Ashok Chawla, Finance Secretary and Government nominee director on the Central Board, 
Smt. Sushma Nath, Secretary, Expenditure, Shri P.V. Bhide, Secretary, Revenue and Dr. 
Arvind Virmani, Chief Economic Advisor.   
The other Directors of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India present at the 
meeting included Prof. U.R.Rao, space scientist and Chairman, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Bangalore, Shri Lakshmi Chand, former Secretary, Government of India, Shri H. 
P. Ranina, Advocate, Supreme Court of India, Dr. Ashok  S. Ganguly, Chairman, First 
Source Solutions Ltd., member of National Knowledge Commission / Investment 
Commission of PM and Prime Minister’s Council on Trade & Industry, Shri Azim Premji, 
Chairman, WIPRO Limited, Smt. Shashi Rajagopalan, consultant with specialisation in 
accounts and finance, voluntary organisations and cooperative legislation , Shri Suresh 
Kumar Neotia, former Chairman of Gujarat Ambuja Cement Co., Dr. A. Vaidyanathan, 
agricultural economist and Professor Emeritus of Madras Institute of Development Studies, 
Prof. Man Mohan Sharma, Chemical Scientist and Emeritus Professor of Eminence of 
Mumbai University Institute of Chemical Technology and Shri Sanjay Labroo, Managing 
Director and CEO of Asahi India Glass Ltd. 
The Finance Minister alluded to the global financial crisis which had also impacted 
India, though not as adversely as several other countries. However, India ’s GDP growth rate 
had slowed down. He said that like all national governments, there had been appropriate 
policy response in India to provide timely relief to distressed institutions, sectors and 
population through fiscal and monetary measures. The Finance Minister was happy to note 
that the positive policy stance had helped India to not only survive but emerge in a relatively 
better shape from the crisis. He said that the budget aims at putting India back on the higher 
growth path and energise the economy to its potential. He also expressed his commitment 
towards return to fiscal consolidation. He emphasised the importance of coordinated fiscal 
and monetary policy. The Finance Minister nostalgically recalled the first time he had addressed the RBI 
Board in 1982 as Finance Minister in Smt. Indira Gandhi ’s Cabinet.  
The Directors acknowledged the challenge faced by the Finance Minister in 
formulating the budget – of balancing the short term compulsions of demand stimulus with 
the need for medium term fiscal consolidation.  Apart from raising issues relating to the 
macro economic situation, the Directors raised issues relating to food and energy security, 
rural infrastructure, upgradation of meteorological systems, skill development and creation of 
jobs, tax base and efficiency and growing protectionism.  
Summing up the discussion, the Governor said that the increased fiscal deficit had 
raised the size of government borrowing significantly and that the RBI will endeavour to 
manage this as in the past in as non-disruptive a manner as possible. 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2009-2010/62
 