he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
July 28, 2009 
First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2009-10 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor 
"This morning, I had a meeting with the chiefs of major banks where we 
announced the monetary policy of the Reserve Bank for the remaining period of 2009-
10 in the light of the macroeconomic developments so far. The meeting also provided a 
valuable opportunity for the Reserve Bank and the commercial banks to understand 
and appreciate each otherís perspectives. 
    Bankers generally welcomed the Reserve Bankís policy stance. They felt that the 
status quo on policy rates would anchor interest rate expectations that could spur 
investment demand. They indicated that they are seeing signs of revival in the domestic 
economy and expect credit demand to pick up in the second half of the year.  In this 
context, I emphasised the need to increase the flow of credit, particularly to agriculture 
and micro, small and medium enterprises.  Banks were concerned that their liability 
structure is getting shorter with the reduction in the term structure of deposits, while the 
asset structure is getting elongated on account of the increasing share of long-term 
loans, particularly infrastructure. Several banks also indicated that the share of current 
and savings (CASA) deposits has been declining, which would put pressure on their net 
interest margins (NIM).  As regards credit quality, banks were of the view that non-
performing assets (NPAs) are expected to increase, particularly, in the unsecured 
segments, although they will remain manageable.  Going forward, public sector banks 
emphasised the need for raising capital as risk-weighted assets expand in their asset 
portfolio. 
Global Economy 
 The global economy is showing incipient signs of stabilisation, albeit not 
recovery. The pace of decline in economic activity in several major advanced 
economies has slowed, frozen credit markets have thawed and equity markets have 
begun to recover. Recent months have also witnessed industrial activity reviving in a 
number of emerging market economies. Notwithstanding some positive signs, the path 
and the time horizon for global recovery remain uncertain in the light of subdued 
consumption demand, increased unemployment levels and in anticipation of further 
contraction in global trade and private capital flows. Business and consumer confidence 
are yet to show definitive signs of revival but the financial sector appears to be 
stabilising in response to concerted actions taken by governments and central banks 
across the world, economic recession in the real sector persists. According to the latest 
assessment by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy is projected 
to shrink by 1.4 per cent in 2009 before recovering and expanding by 2.5 per cent in 
2010. The IMF, however, upgraded the growth outlook for developing Asia citing 
improved prospects in China and India. 
The Crisis and India 
 The Indian economy experienced a significant slowdown in 2008-09, in 
comparison with the robust growth performance in the preceding five years, largely due  2
to the knock-on effect of the global financial crisis. Indiaís exports contracted during 
eight straight months which, in turn, impacted the industrial sector and the services 
sector. The financial sector, however, remained relatively unaffected despite the severe 
stress created by the global deleveraging process, which triggered capital outflows in 
the second half of 2008-09. 
 Quick and aggressive policy responses both by the Government and the 
Reserve Bank mitigated the impact of the global financial crisis. The large domestic 
demand bolstered by the government consumption, provision of forex and rupee 
liquidity coupled with sharp cuts in policy rates, a sound banking sector and well-
functioning financial markets helped cushion the economy from the worst impact of the 
crisis. There are now progressive signs of recovery in India: food stocks have 
increased; industrial production has turned positive; corporate performance has 
improved; business confidence surveys are optimistic; leading indicators show an 
upturn; interest rates have declined; credit off-take has picked up after May 2009; stock 
prices have rebounded; the primary capital market has witnessed some activity; and 
external financing conditions have improved. On the other hand, there are some 
negative signs: delayed and deficient monsoon; food price inflation; rebound in global 
commodity prices; continuing weak external demand; and high fiscal deficit.   
Monetary Policy Action 
 We have adjusted the policy rates several times in the last ten months. 
Currently, the repo rate is at 4.75%, the reverse repo at 3.25%, and the CRR at 5%. 
Consistent with our current assessment of macroeconomic and monetary conditions, 
we have decided to keep all these rates unchanged.  
Reserve Bankís Policy Thrust 
 The thrust of the various policy initiatives by the Reserve Bank since mid-
September 2008 has been on providing ample rupee liquidity, ensuring comfortable 
dollar liquidity and maintaining a market environment conducive for the continued flow 
of credit to all productive sectors. These actions have resulted in augmentation of 
actual/potential liquidity of over Rs.5,61,700 crore. The liquidity situation has remained 
comfortable since mid-November 2008 as evidenced by the LAF window where the 
Reserve Bank has been absorbing nearly Rs.1,20,000 crore on a daily average basis 
during the current financial year. The liquidity expansion has been consistent with the 
Reserve Bankís stance of ensuring a policy regime that will enable credit expansion at 
viable rates while preserving credit quality.  
Interest Rate Response from Banks 
 As liquidity remains ample, the competitive pressure on banks to reduce lending 
rates has increased. Consequently, the transmission of policy rate changes to bank 
lending rates has improved since the last Annual Policy Statement in April 2009. As the 
short-term deposits contracted earlier at high rates mature and get repriced, it opens up 
room for banks to further reduce their lending rates.  
Government Borrowing 
 As a result of the disruption caused by the crisis, the Government deviated from 
the road map for fiscal consolidation set by the FRBM Act. The deficit indicators 
deteriorated sharply in 2008-09 and are projected to be even higher in 2009-10. The 
combined net market borrowings of the Central and State Governments in 2008-09 
were nearly two and half times their net borrowings in 2007-08. These are budgeted to 
increase further by nearly 34 per cent in 2009-10. Management of the large market 
borrowing programme in a non-disruptive manner requires active liquidity management 
and, accordingly, the Reserve Bank indicated its intention to purchase government 
securities under open market operations (OMO) for an indicative amount of Rs.80,000 
crore during the first half of 2009-10.  3
 
 During the first half of 2009-10, net market borrowing of the Central Government 
through dated securities will be Rs.2,65,911 crore, of which nearly 63 per cent 
(Rs.1,67,911 crore) has been completed by July 27, 2009 and an additional amount of 
Rs.28,000 crore has been raised through de-sequestering MSS balances. The open 
market operations (OMO) undertaken so far have been of the order of Rs.33,439 crore, 
accounting for about 42 per cent of the notified amount of Rs.80,000 crore. There is, 
therefore, sufficient headroom available to the Reserve Bank to manage the balance 
borrowing smoothly. It may be noted in this context that during the first half of 2009-10, 
proposed OMO purchases and MSS unwinding will add primary liquidity of Rs.1,50,000 
crore, which by way of monetary impact is equivalent to reduction of CRR by over 3.5 
percentage points. 
Growth Outlook 
 On current assessment, the growth projection for GDP for 2009-10 is placed at 
6.0 per cent with an upward bias. This updated growth projection thus marks a slight 
improvement over the growth expectation of around 6.0 per cent indicated in the Annual 
Policy Statement. The overall macroeconomic scenario continues to be uncertain, 
although it is expected that the fiscal and monetary stimulus measures will supplement 
domestic demand in 2009-10. On balance, an uptrend in the growth momentum is 
unlikely before the middle of 2009-10. 
Inflation Outlook 
 Let me now turn to the inflation prospects. WPI inflation for end-March 2010 is 
projected at around 5.0 per cent ? higher than the projection of 4.0 per cent made in 
the Annual Policy Statement of April 2009. As anticipated, the WPI inflation turned 
negative in June 2009 due to the statistical base effect and not because of any 
contraction in demand. However, the sharp decline in WPI inflation has not been 
commensurately matched by a similar decline in inflation expectations. Within WPI, 
inflation of primary articles, particularly food articles, remains significantly positive. 
Moreover consumer price indices (CPIs) have remained elevated, indeed also 
hardened in recent months. Global commodity prices have rebounded ahead of global 
recovery and the uncertain monsoon outlook could further accentuate food price 
inflation.  
Risks to Growth and Inflation Outlook 
 On balance, the risks to the current projections of real GDP growth and inflation 
for 2009-10 are on the upside.  The comfortable levels of foodgrains stocks should help 
mitigate the risks in the event of price pressures from the supply side. The Reserve 
Bank will also closely monitor the level of liquidity so as to contain inflationary 
expectations if supply side price pressures were to rise. 
Money Supply 
 In order to ensure that the increased Government market borrowing programme 
does not crowd out credit flow to the private sector, the projection of money supply (M ) 
3
growth for 2009-10 has been raised to 18 per cent from 17 per cent indicated in the 
Annual Policy Statement. Consistent with this, aggregate deposits and adjusted non-
food credit of commercial banks are projected to grow by 19 per cent and 20 per cent 
respectively. As always, these numbers are provided as indicative projections and not 
as targets. 
Challenges on the Way Forward 
 There are several immediate and medium term challenges facing the economy 
as highlighted below:   4
ï The first challenge is to manage the balance between the short-term 
compulsions of providing ample liquidity and the potential build-up of inflationary 
pressure on the way forward by maintaining the accommodative monetary 
stance till demand conditions further improve and credit flow takes hold. But we 
need to be ready with a roadmap to reverse the expansionary stance quickly and 
effectively thereafter.  
ï The second challenge is to manage the Governmentís large borrowing 
programme without crowding out present or potential private credit demand. 
Despite active liquidity management by the Reserve Bank, the large and abrupt 
increase in government borrowing has resulted in hardening of yields which 
clearly militated against the low interest rate regime that the economy requires in 
the current situation. 
ï The third challenge is to maintain policy rates and liquidity conditions conducive 
for spurring private investment demand, which has been dented by the crisis.  
ï The fourth challenge is to restore the fiscal consolidation process by laying down 
the roadmap. Large fiscal deficits, if continued strictly beyond the recovery 
period, can crowd out private investment and trigger inflationary pressures. The 
large government borrowing has already led to hardening of yields which have 
impeded monetary transmission. The Government will, therefore, need to return 
to a path of fiscal consolidation which will lend credibility to the fiscal stance and 
also give predictability to economic agents. It is also necessary to focus on the 
quality of fiscal adjustment even while pursuing quantitative targets. 
ï Finally, a big medium-term challenge is to improve the investment climate and 
expand the absorptive capacity of the economy by (i) moving forward with 
financial sector reforms to promote financial inclusion, further widen and deepen 
financial markets and strengthen financial institutions while factoring in the 
lessons of the global economic crisis; and (ii) giving a big thrust to governance 
reforms, without which it is difficult to inspire the trust and confidence of potential 
investors. 
Monetary Policy Stance 
 On the basis of the above overall assessment, the stance of monetary policy for 
the remaining period of 2009-10 will be as follows: 
 
ï Manage liquidity actively so that the credit demand of the Government is met 
while ensuring the flow of credit to the private sector at viable rates.  
 
ï Keep a vigil on the trends and signals of inflation, and be prepared to respond 
quickly and effectively through policy adjustments. 
 
ï Maintain a monetary and interest rate regime consistent with price stability and 
financial stability supportive of returning the economy to the high growth path. 
 The Reserve Bank reiterates that it will maintain an accommodative monetary 
stance until there are definite and robust signs of recovery. This accommodative 
monetary stance is, however, not the steady state. On the way forward, the Reserve 
Bank will have to reverse the expansionary measures to anchor inflation expectations 
and subdue inflationary pressures while preserving the growth momentum. The exit 
strategy will be modulated in accordance with the evolving macroeconomic 
developments." 
 
 
          G. Raghuraj 
Press Release : 2009-2010/154         Deputy General Manager 