 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
 
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 Website : www.rbi.org.in 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
 March 30, 2009  
Financial Sector Self Assessment finds System  
Broadly Robust but Identifies Specific Concerns  
Indiaís financial sector is generally sound, resilient and fairly liquid. The 
financial infrastructure is also assessed to be robust. But there are some concerns, 
according to the report of the Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA). 
These concerns include corporate governance in the co-operative sector, funding 
constraints of Non-Banking Finance Companies and the lack of up-to-date data to 
gauge household indebtedness. The report also finds serious gaps in the timely 
implementation of bankruptcy proceedings. 
This self assessment of Indiaís financial sectoróa comprehensive health 
check-up of the countryís financial sector--was carried out by the Committee on 
Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA) set up by the Government of India and the 
Reserve Bank in September 2006.   The self assessment is motivated by the desire 
to ensure compatibility of the Indian financial sector with international standards and 
assess its overall stability. It also built upon past experience of the IMF/World Bank 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) for India and other self-assessments 
and was enabled by the publication of the Handbook on Financial Sector Assessment, 
published jointly by the IMF and World Bank in September 2005. 
 Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India was the 
Chairman and Shri Ashok Chawla, Shri Ashok Jha and Dr. D Subbarao as 
Secretary, Economic Affairs, Government of India, the Co-Chairmen of the CFSA. 
The Committee submitted its six-volume Report, Indiaís Financial Sector ñ An 
Assessment, to the Honíble Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee on March 25, 
2009 at New Delhi. 
Framework 
The financial assessment process is based on three, mutually reinforcing 
pillars: Pillar I (Financial stability assessment and stress testing), Pillar II (issues 
relating to the institutional and legal infrastructure) and Pillar III (assessment of 
financial standards and codes).  
What tests are performed as part of this financial sector assessment? One 
such test assesses how the countryís financial institutions would handle shocks. This 
is done through ìstress testsî that show whether the individual institutions and the 
banking system would remain solvent in the face of interest rate risks or changes in 
credit quality. The assessment also looks at indicatorsócalled ìfinancial soundness 
indicatorsî ñsuch as capital adequacy, asset quality and profitability ratios, that 
signal the risks and vulnerabilities in the system. 
The second pillar looks at the development issues of financial sector in 
particular focusing upon the legal, liquidity, governance and payment infrastructure 
to assess the strength and adequacy of financial infrastructure.   2
The third analytical component looks at the observance of internationally 
accepted standards, such as the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking 
Supervision, the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation and the 
IAIS Insurance Supervisory Principles, the IMF codes of Good Practices for 
Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies and Fiscal Policies, etc. This allows 
the regulatory authorities and the government to compare the countryís regulatory, 
supervisory and other practices against best practices else where.  
To conduct the independent and impartial assessment, four independent 
Advisory Panels were appointed. The reports put forward by these Advisory Panels, 
inter alia identified gaps in adherence to international standards and codes and 
suggested possible policy actions. These advisory panel reports were also peer 
reviewed by reputed international experts in the field. These independent reviews 
have further ensured an objective and impartial assessment. 
The Reportís Findings  
Sustainability of Macro Economic Growth 
Indiaís growth in the recent period is contributed by several factors. These are 
high domestic demand, productivity, credit growth and high levels of savings and 
investment. The current global financial crisis, however, has resulted in the outlook 
being uncertain in the short term. Though India may face deceleration in its macro 
economic growth in the short term, 8 per cent plus growth for India is sustainable in 
the medium-term. For growth sustainability, however, India needs to focus on revival 
of growth in agriculture, address quick restoration of the fiscal reform path, continue 
financial sector consolidation and development and address the infrastructure deficit. 
While fuller capital account convertibility (FCAC) is desirable, it should be 
concomitant with macroeconomic and market developments. 
Financial Institutions  
Commercial Banks 
Based on the stability assessment and stress testing of the financial 
institutions, the CFSA has found that commercial banking system in India is broadly 
sound. While the banks were generally in a position to absorb significant shocks due 
to credit, liquidity and market risks, there were some concerns relating to liquidity risk 
due to increasing illiquidity in banksí balance sheets. There is, therefore, a need to 
strengthen liquidity management. Looking forward, the stress tests need to be 
conducted on a more systemic basis, to capture second round and contagion risks. 
For this purpose, CFSA has recommended setting up of an inter-disciplinary 
Financial Stability Unit.  
The Government ownership of commercial banks poses dilemmas as it has 
been argued that this could lead to a conflict of roles and regulatory forbearance. 
The possibility of conflicts of interest could be minimised through even-handed 
regulation which has been the case in India. Also, the cost of recapitalisation of 
Indian public sector banks has also been relatively low.  
The Government has, in the past, consistently shown willingness to contribute 
capital and the growth of public sector banks has so far not been constrained 
because of lack of capital. But, capital augmentation of these banks in future could 
be a challenge. This could be managed through a variety of ways, such as, 
amalgamation where commercial synergies exist, raising capital through newer 
instruments (like issuance of perpetual preference shares in foreign currency). If no 
other alternative is available, there could be case for selective dilution of government 
equity which would require amendment of existing legislation.   3
There is a need for capacity building in the commercial banking sector with 
accent on training, succession planning, lateral recruitment and improved 
remuneration (particularly for public sector banks) while at the same time 
discouraging excessive risk-taking through an appropriate and balanced incentives 
structure. A well considered approach for entry of foreign banks in India needs to be 
followed, while adhering to the WTO commitment and norms. Recommending that 
competition must be encouraged, CFSA has advised encouraging market-based 
consolidation of banks. 
The CFSA notes that the power of the Competition Commission regarding 
combination could result in delay of amalgamation of banks. Also, certain provisions 
in the Competition (Amendment) Act 2007 may result in regulatory overlaps and 
conflicts between the Commission and the statutory regulatory authorities. In the 
view of CFSA, Central Government could give necessary exemption under Section 
54 of the Competition (Amendment) Act 2007 in respect of banks to avoid regulatory 
conflicts.  
The CFSA highlights risk management as a priority area and notes that the 
counter-cyclical prudential norms imposed by the Reserve Bank have paid dividends 
in the recent times. It highlights the growing requirement of appropriate accounting 
and disclosure norms, particularly with regard to derivatives transactions as well as 
better management of liquidity risk. In this context, the report recommends 
earmarking a specific capital charge if dependence on purchased liquidity by a 
commercial bank goes beyond a threshold.  
Co-operative Sector 
While the financials of urban co-operative banks have improved, these entities 
still remain vulnerable to credit risk as observed in the stress tests conducted for this 
sector. The financial indicators of the rural co-operatives throw up some cause for 
concern. Noting that co-operative and rural banks have dual control, the CFSA has 
stressed the need for better governance in these institutions.  
Non-banking Financial Companies 
The CFSA notes that while Non-banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) are 
important players in financial markets and their financials were broadly satisfactory, 
funding of this sector is constrained. Development of the corporate bond market 
would ease funding constraints of this sector. Further strengthening of prudential 
regulations of NBFCs has also been suggested.  
Housing Finance Companies 
For the growing and important segment of housing finance companies, the 
CFSA has noted that having a National Housing Price Index and a Housing Starts 
Index is a priority.  
Insurance Sector 
The CFSA noted that the insurance sector has significantly grown in size, 
penetration and diversified products, has comfortable solvency and capital 
adequacy. According to the CFSA the following measures need to be taken for 
further development of the sector: 
ï Supervisory powers of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA) need to be improved; 
ï An effective policy for group-wide supervision needs to be put in place; 
ï Risk management processes require to be improved;  4
ï There is a further requirement of skilled professionals ñ actuaries and treasury 
managers.  
Financial Markets 
The equity, government securities, foreign exchange and money markets 
along with their corresponding derivatives segments have developed into reasonably 
deep and liquid markets and there has been significant increase in domestic market 
integration over the years. However, the credit derivatives market is yet to take off in 
any significant manner. Though the primary market in corporate bonds has seen an 
increase in issuance, the secondary market has not yet developed commensurately. 
Equity Market 
The equity market has witnessed wide-spread development in infrastructure 
and its functioning is comparable to that in advanced markets. It has seen significant 
increase in growth and diversity in composition in the past two decades. Certain 
areas, however, could be further developed. Among the major steps to be 
considered are: 
ï According Self-regulatory Organisation (SRO) status to certain trade and 
industry associations to enhance regulatory efficiency, subject to appropriate 
safeguards; 
ï Further improvements in infrastructure and risk management systems; 
ï More focussed monitoring of market intermediaries; and 
ï Streamlining of issuance procedures by setting up of a central integrated 
platform.  
Foreign Exchange Market 
With the economy moving towards fuller capital account convertibility in a 
calibrated manner, focussed regulation and monitoring of the foreign exchange 
market assumes added importance. There is though a need to strengthen 
infrastructure, transparency and disclosure, and product range in the forex 
derivatives segment. Strengthening the trading infrastructure, market conduct, 
transparency of Over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives in the forex market, accounting 
and disclosures in line with international practices, including disclosures by non-bank 
corporates, needs to be done on a priority basis. The recent introduction of currency 
futures is a step in this direction. 
Government Securities Market 
The government securities market has witnessed significant transformation in its 
various facets: market-based price discovery, widening of the investor base, 
introduction of new instruments, establishment of primary dealers and electronic 
trading and settlement infrastructure. This is the outcome of persistent and high-
quality reforms in developing the government securities market. Increased 
transparency and disclosures, gradual scaling down of mandated investments and 
development of newer instruments are some major areas which could be considered 
for further development. Regulatory incentives to increase the size of trading book 
could also be considered as a measure to further develop the government securities 
market. 
Money Market 
The money market is an important channel for monetary policy transmission 
and India has generally conformed to being a liquid market. In the ongoing global 
financial crisis, the Indian money market has continued to function normally. The 
gradual shift towards a collateralised inter-bank market, phasing out of non-bank  5
participants from the call and notice money market, policy direction towards 
reductions in cash reserve requirements, the introduction of new instruments, such 
as, Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO), implementation of Real 
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), significant transformation of monetary operations 
framework towards market-based arrangements and facilitating trading through 
Negotiated Dealing System ñ Call Money (NDS-CALL) are some of the reform 
measures that have contributed to the development of a relatively vibrant and liquid 
money market. However, the limitations of market participants in  taking a medium-  
term perspective on interest rates and liquidity, coupled with the absence of a 
credible long-term benchmark, constraining further market development that  needs 
to be addressed. 
Corporate Bond Market 
The development of the corporate bond market could be a source of long-
term finance for corporates. The development of this market currently suffers from 
lack of buying interest, absence of pricing of spreads against the benchmark and a 
flat yield curve. It requires further regulatory and legislative reforms for its 
development and reforms in the pension and insurance sectors to aid in the 
emergence of large institutional investors. 
Credit Derivatives 
The unbridled proliferation of complex credit derivatives and excessive risk 
transfer by adoption of the originate-to-distribute model is recognised as one of the 
root causes of the current financial crisis. The recent credit turmoil has also 
underscored the importance of liquidity risk arising from off-balance sheet 
commitments, implicit or explicit, of the credit intermediaries. The Reserve Bank had 
put in place regulatory guidelines that were aligned with global best practices while 
tailoring them to meet country-specific requirements. While the development of 
markets for credit derivatives and asset securitisation products could play a critical 
role in furthering economic growth, this requires to be pursued in a gradual manner 
by sequencing reforms and putting in place appropriate safeguards before 
introduction of such products. 
Financial Infrastructure 
Regulatory Structure 
The assessment of the regulatory and supervisory environment of financial 
institutions has been done with reference to the Basel Core Principles (BCPs). The 
coverage of the assessment has been made broader to include the non-banking 
sector as well because of the inherent linkages that such institutions have and their 
consequent impact on the stability of the financial system. The assessment of 
regulation and supervision in the insurance sector has been done with reference to 
International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) Core Principles. The 
assessments found the regulatory environment to be generally satisfactory, the 
major gaps being in risk management and cross-border supervisory co-operation.  
Similarly, the International Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO) 
Principles for Securities Regulation are generally applicable to the equity and 
corporate bond markets. However, taking into account their importance for systemic 
stability, the Advisory Panel on Financial Regulation and Supervision has also 
assessed the foreign exchange, money and government securities markets against 
IOSCO principles as relevant and applicable. The overall assessment shows that the 
regulatory and supervisory infrastructure is generally robust as evidenced by the fact 
that the recent market volatility has not resulted in any settlement failure though 
home-host co-operation remained a major gap across market segments.  6
The CFSA feels that the existence of multiple regulators is perhaps consistent 
with the current stage of financial development in India, but stressed the need for 
further improvement of effective regulatory coordination.  
Alluding to principles-based versus rules-based regulation, the CFSA 
observes that both needed to play a complementary role. Ideally it is desirable to 
identify a set of principles and then group the existing rules under them and consider 
validating the rules under these broad principles. This would also obviate the 
rules/regulations degenerating into ad-hocism. 
There is no legislation specifically permitting regulation of financial 
conglomerates and holding companies in India. The Reserve Bank could, in the 
interests of financial stability, be armed with sufficient supervisory powers and 
monitoring functions in respect of financial conglomerates. Legislation of a new Act is 
required to empower the Reserve Bank to have regulatory jurisdiction of the holding 
company. Allowing ëintermediateí holding companies, however, may not be feasible 
till an appropriate regulatory structure for such an entity is in place. In the interest of 
financial stability, there is a need for strengthening inter-regulatory co-operation and 
information-sharing arrangements, both within and across borders among the 
regulators. 
There is a view that SROs could potentially enhance regulatory efficiency and 
optimise regulatory costs. As SROs are essentially trade bodies, issues relating to 
conflict of interest could arise. Hence, it is necessary that issues like armís length 
relationship of SROs with the associated trade bodies and their corporate 
governance policies be looked into by the regulator before according SRO status to 
any entity.   
Liquidity Infrastructure 
Systems and procedures need to be developed for smoothing out volatility in 
liquidity and call money rates arising out of quarterly tax payments. Hence, there is a 
need to strengthen management of government cash balances. The introduction of 
auction of Central Government surplus balances with the Reserve Bank in a non-
collateralised manner could be considered, though with appropriate caution, which 
would also make available the government securities in the Reserve Bankís 
investment accounts for its own market operations.  
There is a need for strengthening the asset-liability management of banks, 
including the development of the term money market as also the development of 
liquidity forecasting techniques.  
In the context of the management of the capital account, the key issue for the 
monetary authority is to determine whether the capital inflows are of a permanent 
and sustainable nature or temporary and subject to sudden stops and reversals. 
There is a need to examine the likely implications of excessive inflows and outflows 
on monetary operations. Strategic management of the capital account would warrant 
preparedness for all situations.  
Since the currency risk has the potential to transform into credit risk, banks 
should strengthen monitoring of unhedged positions of corporates.   
Accounting and Auditing Standards 
The ongoing global financial crisis and subsequent problems relating to 
derivatives transactions in India have brought to the fore the necessity for early 
adoption of accounting standards AS 30 and 31 relating to financial instruments. 
The autonomy of the Accounting Standards Board (ASB) would be greatly 
enhanced if it is given the authority to issue the standards and the Council of Institute  7
of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) confines itself to the administrative, but not 
the functional, control of the ASB. There is a need for the ASB to consider the 
development of standards on various subjects as also to provide sector-specific 
guidance. Similarly, there is a need to give functional independence to the Auditing 
and Accounts Standards Board (AASB) vis-‡-vis the Council of the Institute by 
making it the final authority for drafting and issuance of the standards, with the 
Council confining itself to administrative, but not functional, control of AASB. 
Business Continuity Management 
The increased dependence on information technology systems by financial 
institutions for transactions as well as record maintenance gives rise to a need for 
proactively managing business continuity. The assessment of compliance to 
business continuity principles, as applied to select banks, and the payment and 
settlements systems has indicated that, overall, the systems available in these 
institutions were in consonance with the requirements. However, certain issues like 
outsourcing applications, system maintenance and change control and incident 
response simulation are required to be monitored more closely from the Business 
Continuity Management (BCM) angle. Continuous upgrading of BCM processes as 
also capacity building of regulators remain areas that should be under constant 
focus. In addition to IT related issues, human resource management with proper 
succession planning also merits attention. 
Payment and Settlement Infrastructure 
A smooth and efficient payment and settlement infrastructure plays an 
important role in maintaining stability in the financial sector. The CFSA 
acknowledges that significant progress has been made in improving the payment 
systems infrastructure in India with the introduction of RTGS, High Value Cheque 
Clearing System, setting up of Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) as the 
central counterparty in the government securities, foreign exchange and CBLO 
segments as also system improvements in the settlement of equities transactions. 
The legal framework for payment and settlement has also been strengthened by the 
recent notification of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act and Rules. This has 
made India largely compliant with international standards and codes in this area. The 
assessments have, however, highlighted some gaps in the system, particularly with 
regard to the adequacy of financial resources with CCIL and improving its risk 
management measures.  
The current low utilisation of the electronic payments infrastructure can be 
increased with the use of technology to make the facilities more accessible to 
customers, thus optimising the use of this infrastructure and achieving greater 
financial inclusion.  
Legal Infrastructure 
The CFSA notes that though there have been improvements in legal 
infrastructure in the financial sector like setting up of Debt Recovery Tribunals 
(DRTs) and the enactment of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Securities Interest (SARFAESI) Act, the major concern is 
that, despite the robust insolvency laws, the time taken for completion of liquidation 
proceedings is one of the highest in the world and the recovery rate one of the 
lowest. The operationalisation of the Companies Act (Second Amendment), 2002 will 
address the current problems relating to delays in completion of liquidation 
proceedings. The CFSA considers that a separate insolvency regime for banks and 
other categories of financial institutions is vital in the context of financial stability, as 
any inefficient handling of insolvency of such institutions could have a serious  8
contagion effect and repercussions across the economic system that will destabilise 
economic activity. 
Corporate Governance 
In India, there is a comprehensive corporate governance framework in place 
for listed companies and the listing agreement forms an important pillar of corporate 
governance framework. There is a need to strengthen the corporate governance 
framework with regard to risk management in listed companies. Listed companies 
need to disclose the reasons for non-compliance with non-mandatory requirements. 
Steps need to be taken to protect the interests of shareholders, such as equitable 
treatment of all shareholders including minority shareholders and alternate methods 
of voting, which are convenient for shareholders and in which investor associations 
can play a constructive role. There is a need for strengthening the disclosure 
mechanism to bring about greater transparency in ownership structures and 
stringent penal action needs to be taken where such practices are unearthed. Penal 
provisions for fraudsters may be strengthened in corporate law by providing for 
disgorgement of gains and confiscation of assets. The corporate governance 
framework needs to evolve with the changing times and there is a parallel need to 
strengthen the corporate governance framework for unlisted companies. 
Safety Net ñ Deposit Insurance 
The coverage limit of deposit insurance offered by the Deposit Insurance and 
Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) is comparable to international levels. Stress 
tests to ascertain the adequacy of the Deposit Insurance Fund shows that the 
DICGC would be in a position to meet the claims even under a worst-case scenario. 
While there is an element of cross-subsidisation of the flat premium charged by the  
DICGC, a risk-adjusted premium could prove to be expensive for weak financial 
entities. An increase in ceiling of flat rate premia could, therefore, be considered to 
strengthen the deposit insurance fund, if required. The delay in the failure resolution 
process and the non-involvement of the DICGC in the failure resolution process 
remain major concerns. In order to enhance the efficacy of the deposit insurance 
system in India, it is felt that the pros and cons of DICGCís involvement in the 
bankruptcy process need to be deliberated upon. Alternatively, delinking of DICGC 
claims from liquidation proceedings by amendments to the DICGC Act and Banking 
Regulation Act could be considered. There is a case for providing exemption from 
income tax to the DICGC.  
Review of AML/CFT 
Major areas where action needs to be taken to further strengthen Anti-money 
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) practices and 
align them with international standards are the effective implementation of 
recordkeeping requirements and a robust regime for submission of Suspicious 
Transactions Reports (STRs) and inclusion of money transfer agencies in Prevention 
of Money-Laundering Act (PMLA). 
Transparency and Data Dissemination 
India has made significant progress in enhancing transparency in monetary 
and financial policies, fiscal arena and data dissemination. There are some areas 
where further transparency and disclosure can be achieved.  
Transparency in Monetary Policy 
India is largely compliant with the IMFís Code of Good Practices on 
Transparency in Monetary Policy. The roles, responsibilities and objectives of the 
Reserve Bank are well-defined. The Reserve Bank has explicit multiple objectives of 
monetary policy with changing relative emphasis. It also follows a multiple indicator  9
approach, which has been reasonably effective. The present legislative framework 
provides enough room and manoeuvrability for the Reserve Bank to operate 
monetary policy in consonance with evolving needs and circumstances. The key 
element of the framework at present is the flexibility enjoyed by the Reserve Bank 
while going about its assigned task of maintaining the monetary stability of India. The 
main issues that have come out of the assessment of transparency in monetary 
policy pertain to the review of legislations with regard to the objectives of monetary 
policy, the issue of operational independence and accountability of the Reserve 
Bank and the separation of debt management from monetary management.  
As far as the issue of operational independence of the central bank is 
concerned, the Reserve Bank enjoys independence vis-‡-vis the executive arm of 
the state through conventions, agreements and MoUs in specific areas. The 
specification of procedures and reasons for the removal of the Governor/Deputy 
Governor as also for supersession of the Board could potentially lead to the loss of 
well-established de facto independence. Any modifications that might be required to 
strengthen monetary policy as also the regulatory framework might be carried out by 
necessary amendments to existing legislations as needed, which would not call for a 
fundamental review of legislations or an overhaul of the existing legal framework. 
The CFSA feels that an overhaul of legislation may not be appropriate at the current 
juncture.  
Following the announcement in the Union Budget 2007-08, the Central 
Government is proceeding with the establishment of a Middle Office, as a prelude to 
setting up of a full-fledged Debt Management Office (DMO). While most members of 
the CFSA concurred with the proposal to set up a DMO, one member felt that the 
DMO should be an independent body. The Chairman, however, was personally of 
the view that the time is not ripe for the complete separation of debt management 
from the Reserve Bank at the current juncture. 
Transparency in Financial Policies 
The Reserve Bank, SEBI and IRDA are compliant with the relevant standards 
in transparency in financial policies. Any move to institutionalise the High Level 
Coordination Committee for Financial Markets (HLCCFM) could prove to be counter-
productive as it could reduce flexibility in the formulation of financial policies; 
however, the present information-sharing mechanism could be improved. 
Fiscal Transparency 
The major area of concern arising out of the assessment of fiscal 
transparency is in the reporting of off-budget items, like oil bonds, and the need to 
have an additional augmented fiscal deficit measure to capture these items. 
Likewise, any move towards accrual-based accounting should also be attempted in a 
gradual manner. 
Data Dissemination Standards 
There has been significant improvement in the data dissemination practices of 
various agencies, namely, the Central Statistical Organisation, the Office of the 
Economic Adviser in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Reserve Bank. 
There is an urgent need to strengthen the functioning and data dissemination 
practices of the CSO, which had weakened after data submission became a 
voluntary process. There is also a need to consolidate the process of compiling 
labour data and this should be done by a professional statistical organisation. As far 
as price indices are concerned, updating the weights and inclusion of new products 
in the basket of goods needs to be expedited. 
  10
 
Development Issues in the Socio-economic Context 
A stability assessment of the financial sector should also address broader 
development aspects in the socio-economic context, which affect social stability and 
have an indirect bearing on financial stability. 
Financial inclusion is one of the major determinants of economic growth. 
Higher economic growth and infrastructure, in turn, play a crucial role in promoting 
financial inclusion. In order to achieve the objective of growth with equity, it is 
imperative that infrastructure is developed in tandem with financial inclusion, as this 
would facilitate and enhance credit absorptive capacity. 
 
 
 Ajit Prasad 
Press Release: 2008-2009/1610         Manager 
 
 
 