he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
October 27, 2009 
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2009-10: 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor  
"This morning, I had a meeting with the chiefs of major banks where we 
discussed recent economic developments and where I announced the Second Quarter 
Review of the Reserve Bankís Monetary Policy for 2009-10. In the run up to this policy 
review, we consulted with a wide array of stakeholders and took their views on board. 
Banks generally welcomed the Reserve Bankís policy stance. They agreed with 
the Reserve Bankís emphasis on credit flows, particularly to agriculture and micro, 
small and medium enterprises to support the revival of growth. They indicated that 
while underlying economic activity has picked up, credit demand remains muted 
because the access of financing from external and domestic non-bank sources has 
eased significantly. Banks felt that credit growth prospects remain favourable going 
forward. Apart from credit offtake, discussion centred around specific issues such as 
the new liberalised policy on branch authorisation, changes in provisioning norms, 
infrastructure financing, currency management, priority sector lending certificates 
(PSLCs), and the recommendations of the Working Group on BPLR. Banks welcomed 
the liberalised policy on branch authorisation, which together with the liberalised 
business correspondents model, according to them, should promote financial inclusion 
and increase credit flow. As regards infrastructure financing by banks, the view was that 
while banks have a role in infrastructure financing, eventually it should be done through 
the corporate bond market with participation by long-term institution investors. Banks 
recognised the role of take-out financing and indicated that they are working with India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. (IIFCL) on this issue. While banks welcomed the 
move to increase the provisioning requirement on commercial real estate exposures, 
they suggested certain modifications in the calculation of the provisioning cover and 
requested for more time. The Reserve Bank emphasised the importance of using 
modern technology, including note sorting machines. There was a general feeling that 
the merits and demerits of PSLCs need to be carefully examined. Banks were urged to 
generate the debate through seminars and workshops on the recommendations of the 
Working Group on BPLR. 
Global Economy 
There has been a discernable improvement in the global economy since the last 
review in July 2009. The recovery is underpinned by output expansion in emerging 
market economies, particularly in Asia. World output improved in the second quarter, 
manufacturing activity has picked up, trade is recovering, financial market conditions 
are improving, and risk appetite is returning. A sharp recovery in equity markets has 
enabled banks to raise capital to repair their balance sheets. There are concerns, 
however, that the recovery is fragile. Even as output is reviving, unemployment is 
expected to increase to over 10 per cent.  Investment is also expected to remain weak 
due to ruptured balance sheets, excess capacity and financing constraints. Bank  2
collapses are continuing. World trade still remains below its level a year ago. On 
balance, while global economic prospects have improved, uncertainties remain about 
the pace and sustainability of economic recovery. 
Indian Economy 
In India, too, there are definitive indications of the economy attaining the ëescape 
velocityí and reverting to the growth track. This is despite the continuing contraction in 
exports and the worst drought since 1972. The performance of the industrial sector has 
improved markedly in recent months. Domestic and external financing conditions are on 
the upturn. Capital inflows have revived. Activity in the primary capital market has 
picked up and funding from non-bank domestic sources has eased. Liquidity conditions 
have remained easy and interest rates have softened in the money and credit markets. 
At the same time, some concerns persist. There are clear signs of rising inflation 
stemming largely from the supply side, particularly from food prices. Private 
consumption demand is yet to pick up. Agricultural production is expected to decline. 
Services sector growth remains below trend. Bank credit growth continues to be 
sluggish. 
Government Borrowing 
Management of the large government market borrowing programme in a non-
disruptive manner has been a major challenge for the Reserve Bank. Consistent with 
the accommodative monetary stance, the Reserve Bank expanded its domestic assets 
through open market operations (OMO) and unwinding of market stabilisation scheme 
(MSS) securities to provide primary liquidity to support the borrowing programme. 
During 2009-10 so far, the Central Government has already completed over 80 per cent 
(Rs.3,19,911 crore) of its net market borrowing and State Governments have mobilised 
Rs.58,683 crore (net) through the market borrowing programme. Because of the front-
loading of the market borrowing programme, net issuances under the Central 
Government borrowing programme in the remaining period of 2009-10 will be only 
around Rs.62,500 crore. In the context of the debate on raising the held to maturity 
(HTM) investment limit for banks, on considerations of the merits and demerits of the 
issue, the Reserve Bank has determined that it is not advisable to raise the HTM ratio. 
Liquidity Situation and Interest Rates 
The liquidity situation has remained comfortable since mid-November 2008 as 
evidenced by large absorption of nearly Rs.1,20,000 crore on a daily average basis 
under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) window of the Reserve Bank. With most 
commercial banks reducing their deposit rates, the cost of funds has declined enabling 
banks to reduce their lending rates. 
Growth Outlook 
On current assessment, the growth projection for GDP for 2009-10 has been 
retained at 6.0 per cent with an upward bias, unaltered from that made in the July 
review.  This assumes a modest decline in agricultural production, as the South-West 
monsoon rainfall this year has been the weakest since 1972 affecting both yield and 
acreage of agricultural crops, but a faster recovery in industrial production. 
Inflation Outlook 
Inflation assessment has become increasingly complex in recent times in view of 
the wide divergence between the inflation rate based on the WPI and the various CPI 
inflation measures. The situation was aggravated by the deficient monsoon rainfall and 
drought condition in several parts of the country. While CPI inflation is now in double 
digit, the WPI inflation rate remains low.  3
Taking into account the global trend in commodity prices and the domestic 
demand-supply balance, the base line projection for WPI inflation at end-March 2010 is 
placed at 6.5 per cent with an upward bias. This is higher than that of 5.0 per cent WPI 
inflation projected in the July 2009 Review as the upside risks have materialised. 
Money Supply 
Keeping in view the borrowing requirement of the Government and of the 
commercial sector in the remaining period of 2009-10, the indicative projection of 
money supply growth of 18 per cent set out in July 2009 Review is revised downwards 
to 17 per cent. Consistent with this, aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks 
are projected to grow by 18 per cent. The growth in adjusted non-food credit, including 
investment in bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private 
corporate sector and CPs, is also revised downwards to 18 per cent from 20 per cent 
set out earlier.  Banks are urged once again to step up their efforts towards credit 
expansion while preserving credit quality, which is critical for revival of growth. 
Managing the Recovery: Some Issues 
The attention around the world, as also in India, has shifted from managing the 
crisis to managing the recovery. The policy dilemma for India is different in some 
important respects from that of advanced economies as well as other emerging market 
economies for the following reasons: 
ï Most of these countries do not face an immediate risk of inflation, whereas India 
is actively confronted with an upturn in inflation. 
ï India has the challenge of reviving domestic consumption and investment 
demand, the traditional, dominant drivers of our growth, although households, 
firms and financial institutions in India are not struggling with impaired balance 
sheets unlike in advanced economies. 
ï India has traditionally been a supply constrained economy in contrast to 
advanced economies which are demand starved. The supply constraints, which 
remained subdued during the crisis period due to weak demand, will re-emerge 
and may indeed become binding. 
ï India is one of the few large emerging economies with twin deficits ñ fiscal and 
current account deficits. 
Exit Strategy 
 Around the world there is an active debate on the timing and sequencing of exit 
from the expansionary monetary stance. ëExití is a central issue in our policy matrix too. 
The challenge for the Reserve Bank is to support the recovery process without 
compromising on price stability. Growth drivers warrant a delayed exit, while inflation 
concerns call for an early exit. Premature exit will derail the fragile growth, but a 
delayed exit can potentially engender inflation expectations. This calls for a careful 
management of trade-offs. 
 We have studied all the arguments for and against reversal of monetary easing. 
These arguments are detailed in the policy review document. The balance of judgment 
at the current juncture is that it may be appropriate to sequence the ëexití in a calibrated 
way so that while the recovery process is not hampered, inflation expectations remain 
anchored. 
Monetary Policy Stance 
On the basis of the above overall assessment, the stance of monetary policy for 
the remaining period of 2009-10 will be as follows:  4
ï Keep a vigil on the trends in inflation and be prepared to respond swiftly and 
effectively through policy adjustments to stabilise inflation expectations. 
ï Monitor the liquidity situation closely and manage it actively to ensure that credit 
demands of productive sectors are adequately met while also securing price 
stability and financial stability. 
ï Maintain a monetary and interest rate regime consistent with price stability and 
financial stability, and supportive of the growth process. 
Way Forward 
The Reserve Bank will continue to monitor the price situation in its entirety and 
will take measures as warranted by the evolving macroeconomic conditions swiftly and 
effectively. 
Monetary Policy Measures 
For now, the Reserve Bank has decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged 
at 4.75 per cent, the reverse repo rate unchanged at 3.25 per cent and the CRR of 
banks unchanged at 5 per cent of their NDTL.  
The following measures constitute the first phase of ëexití: 
ï The statutory liquidity ratio (SLR), which was reduced from 25 per cent of 
demand and time liabilities to 24 per cent, is being restored to 25 per cent. 
ï The limit for export credit refinance facility, which was raised to 50 per cent of 
eligible outstanding export credit, is being returned to the pre-crisis level of 15 
per cent. 
ï The two unconventional refinance facilities: (i) special refinance facility for 
scheduled commercial banks; and (ii) special term repo facility for scheduled 
commercial banks [for funding to mutual funds (MFs), non-banking financial 
companies (NBFCs), and housing finance companies (HFCs)] are being 
discontinued with immediate effect. 
Further, the liabilities of scheduled banks arising from transactions in 
collateralised borrowing and lending obligations (CBLO) with Clearing Corporation of 
India Ltd. (CCIL) would now be subject to the maintenance of the cash reserve ratio 
(CRR). 
Developmental and Regulatory Issues 
Let me now turn to development and regulatory issues. While India has been 
less affected by the crisis than most other countries, there are lessons from the crisis 
for India too, which include: (i) further strengthening regulation at the systemic and 
institutional levels; (ii) making our supervision more effective and value adding; and (iii) 
improving our skills in risk management. Further, we need to actively pursue the 
challenge of financial inclusion. I will highlight a few actions being taken by us: 
Financial Stability 
ï Releasing of the first Financial Stability Report for India by December 2009. 
Interest Rates 
ï Considering the recommendations of the Working Group on the Benchmark 
Prime Lending Rate (BPLR) system after receiving feedback. 
 
  5
Financial Market Products 
ï Proposal to introduce plain vanilla over-the-counter (OTC) single-name Credit 
Default Swaps (CDS) for corporate bonds for resident entities subject to 
appropriate safeguards. The operational framework will be finalised in 
consultation with market participants. 
ï Permitting recognised stock exchanges to offer currency futures contracts in 
currency pairs of Rupee-Euro, Rupee-Pound Sterling and Rupee-Japanese Yen, 
in addition to the existing Rupee-US dollar contracts. 
Regulatory Measures 
ï Increasing the provisioning requirement for advances to the commercial real 
estate sector classified as ëstandard assetsí from 0.4 per cent to 1.0 per cent. 
ï Liberalising the extant branch authorisation policy for domestic non-RRB 
scheduled commercial banks. 
ï Allowing banks to build up capital for take-out exposures in a phased manner. 
ï Advising banks to augment their provisioning cushions consisting of specific 
provisions against non-performing assets (NPAs) as well as floating provisions 
so that their total provisioning coverage ratio, including floating provisions, 
reaches 70 per cent by September 2010. 
ï Issuing guidelines to private sector and foreign banks with regard to sound 
compensation policies. 
ï Introducing a category of NBFCs as ëinfrastructure NBFCsí, defined as entities 
which hold minimum of 75 per cent of their total assets for financing   
infrastructure projects. 
ï Linking the risk weights of banksí exposure to infrastructure NBFCs to the credit 
rating assigned to the NBFC by external credit assessment institutions (ECAIs). 
Financial Inclusion 
ï Allowing banks to (i) appoint the additional entities as business correspondents 
(BC); and (ii) collect reasonable service charges from the customer in a 
transparent manner for delivering the services through BC. 
ï Advising the lead banks to take steps to draw up a road map by March 2010 to 
provide banking services through a banking outlet in every village having a 
population of over 2,000, by March 2011. 
ï Constituting a Working Group to examine the issues involved in the introduction 
of priority sector lending certificates (PSLCs). 
Currency Management 
ï Mandating banks to install note sorting machines in all their branches in a 
phased manner in terms of a road map to be approved by the Reserve Bank." 
 
 
 
G. Raghuraj 
Press Release : 2009-2010/632             Deputy General Manager 