 he¥sme he¥ke¿eMeÙer  PRESS RELEASE ?  
 
Yeejler≥e fj ?eJeı yeQke¿ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
JesyemeeFÏ : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
mebÆeej fJeYee‰e, keW¿Ír≥e ke¿e≥eeıue≥e, Sme.yer.Sme.cee‰eı, cegbyeFı 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
F-cesue email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
He¿esÙe/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Hew¿keÃme/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
August 27, 2009 
 
RBI releases Annual Report for 2008-09 
 
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Annual Report for 2008-2009. 
 
Overall Performance 
 
The Indian economy exhibited significant resilience in 2008-09 in the face of an 
intense global financial crisis and the subsequent severe global recession. In a 
globalised world, however, the natural process of transmission of contagion operating 
through the trade, capital flows and confidence channels affected the domestic 
economic and financial conditions. Real GDP growth, which had averaged at 8.8 per 
cent during 2003-08, decelerated to 6.7 per cent in 2008-09. 
  
When the global markets turned dysfunctional in September 2008, with intense 
scramble for liquidity and subsequent credit freeze under the pressure of deleveraging, 
the Indian markets reverberated the shock, which was seen in the form of higher 
volatility in all segments of the financial markets and sharp corrections in stock prices. 
The macro-financial conditions remained exceptionally challenging from the stand point 
of the conduct of Reserve Bankís policies, as it had to respond to multiple challenges, 
starting from containment of inflation in the first half of the year to moderating the 
deceleration in growth, preserving the soundness of the banks and financial institutions, 
ensuring normal functioning of the credit market and maintaining orderly conditions in 
the financial markets in the second half. At times, the Bank had to operate on multiple 
fronts simultaneously, and in consultation and coordination with the Government, with 
the overriding objective of limiting the adverse effects of the global crisis to the extent 
possible. Consequently, the financial system functioned without disruptions and credit 
conditions did not operate as a constraint to growth. For the Government, the fiscal 
response involved temporary deviation from the fiscal consolidation process embodied 
in the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act. Reflecting the 
expansionary fiscal policy response to the slowdown in growth driven by sharp 
deceleration in private consumption demand, government consumption demand 
increased, and the contribution of government consumption expenditure to overall 
growth accordingly increased to 32.5 per cent in 2008-09 from an average of 5.9 per 
cent in the preceding five years. 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF 2008-09 
 
Economic Growth 
 
The deceleration in growth, which started with the cyclical slowdown in the first 
half of 2008-09, got magnified in the second half due to the contagion from the global 
crisis. Deceleration in growth to 5.8 per cent in two successive quarters in the second 
half of 2008-09 represented the weakest growth in recent period; more importantly,  2
while industrial growth turned negative in the last quarter, the deceleration in services 
persisted in all successive quarters of the year.  
 
The sharp moderation in GDP growth warranted appropriate fiscal and monetary 
policy response, which was delivered swiftly, that too in a forward looking manner in the 
second half of the year, in anticipation of the adverse ramifications of the global crisis 
on domestic growth.  
 
The Fiscal Stance  
 
The unprecedented magnitude and complexity of the challenge necessitated 
temporary deviation from the fiscal consolidation process embodied in the Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act. The combined fiscal deficit of the 
Central and State Governments (including the special securities issued to oil marketing 
and fertiliser companies), thus, reached 10.7 per cent of GDP in 2008-09. 
 
Financing of Fiscal Deficit 
 
The challenge associated with financing of higher deficits emerged in the form of 
managing large borrowing programmes of the Governments without disrupting the 
markets, and more importantly, without exerting upward pressures on the interest rates. 
Significant moderation in inflation in the second half of the year; the deceleration in 
demand for non-food credit, reflecting the slowdown in growth; and the decline in non-
bank sources of funding for the commercial sector created the headroom for smoother 
management of the borrowing programme. 
  
The Monetary Stance 
 
The accommodative monetary policy stance in the post-September 2008 period 
was reflected in 400 basis points reduction in CRR, 4.25 percentage point reduction in 
the repo rate, 2.75 percentage point reduction in reverse repo rate and several other 
conventional as well as non-conventional windows for access to liquidity (resulting in 
the availability of more than Rs.4,00,000 crore of additional actual/potential liquidity to 
the system by the end of the year), The Reserve Bank ensured ample surplus liquidity 
in the system to ensure flow of credit to productive sectors, within the prudence 
necessary for preserving the asset quality of the banks. 
 
Inflation Divergence 
 
Headline inflation, as measured by year-on-year variations in the WPI, declined 
sharply to 0.84 per cent by end-March 2009 from the peak of 12.91 per cent on August 
02, 2008. The prices of food articles, however, continued to rule high, as a result of 
which the consumer price indices (CPIs) remained firm near double digit levels, given 
the higher weight of food articles in CPIs. The Reserve Bankís Annual Policy Statement 
in April 2009 recognised the emerging significant divergences between inflation in WPI 
and CPIs and emphasised that for policy purposes it continuously monitors the full 
array of price indicators. 
  
External Contagion and Financial Markets 
 
In the post-September 2008 period, the major concern for the Reserve Bank was 
to deal with the knock-on effects of the global financial crisis. Demand for liquidity had 
increased from many quarters, that too suddenly. Corporates had increased the 
demand for credit at home as a substitute for external financing in the face of global 
credit squeeze. Access to trade credit was becoming difficult, and the cost also had 
gone up. NBFCs and mutual funds, given the nature of their sources of funds, also 
faced major liquidity shortage. In view of the capital outflows and the pressures on the 
balance of payments in the third quarter of the year, the exchange rate came under  3
pressure, which warranted intervention operations by the Reserve Bank to restore 
orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market. This, in turn, implied corresponding 
contraction in rupee liquidity in the banking system. The Reserve Bank, thus, had to 
ensure supply of adequate rupee as well as foreign currency liquidity to restore the call 
money rate within the LAF corridor and also to contain volatility in the exchange rate. 
 
Reserve Bankís Responses to the Contagion 
  
For enhancing the availability of domestic liquidity, besides the usual reduction in 
CRR, greater access under the LAF through repos, and unwinding of the MSS 
securities, several other conventional as well as unconventional instruments were also 
used depending on the nature and expected magnitude of the demand for liquidity, 
such as a second LAF window providing access to liquidity in the afternoon as against 
the normal LAF access in the morning, special 14 days repo facility using SLR eligible 
securities up to 1.5 per cent of NDTL for meeting the liquidity needs of NBFCs, housing 
finance companies and mutual funds, advance release of money at the request of the 
Government to the banks towards Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 
increase in export credit refinance limit for commercial banks, and special refinance 
facilities for specialised financial institutions such as the SIDBI, NHB and EXIM Bank. 
  
For dealing with the excess demand conditions in the foreign exchange market, 
given particularly the objective of containing excessive large volatility, a number of 
measures were initiated to ease the supply situation by partly assuring greater access 
to the Reserve Bankís foreign reserves and partly by improving the inflows in response 
to specific measures. 
  
Regulatory and Supervisory Stance 
 
Recognising the difficult challenges in the credit market, the Reserve Bank had 
to balance the priorities of credit quality and improved credit delivery. As counter 
cyclical regulatory measures, the Reserve Bank reduced to normal levels the 
provisioning requirement for standard assets and risk weights for certain asset classes, 
which had been increased earlier during the period of rapid credit growth. With a view 
to further strengthening the domestic banking sector, the Reserve Bank also undertook 
a number of other regulatory initiatives. 
 
Despite the risk of contagion from the global financial crisis, the Indian banking 
system remained sound and resilient, as evident from the soundness indicators like 
capital adequacy, asset quality and profitability for 2008-09. While the capital adequacy 
level for the banking system was at 13.2 per cent at the end of the year, each individual 
bank was above the minimum 9 per cent capital adequacy requirement prescribed by 
the Reserve Bank. Stress-testing findings of the Committee on Financial Sector 
Assessment (CFSA) also suggested the resilience of the financial system and the 
adequacy of capital levels. 
  
The Resilient External Sector 
 
The external sector of the economy exhibited resilience despite significant 
pressures on the balance of payments through the trade and capital flow channels, 
particularly in the third quarter of the 2008-09, when the reserve loss (excluding 
valuation) was US$ 18 billion in just one quarter. While net capital flows remained 
negative even in the fourth quarter of the year, the reserve loss was negligible because 
of surplus in the current account. For the year as a whole, the current account deficit 
widened to 2.6 per cent of GDP in 2008-09 from 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2007-08, with a 
total loss of reserves of US$ 20.1 billion (net of valuation). 
  
  4
PROSPECTS FOR 2009-10 
 
The Uncertain Global Outlook 
 
The IMFís assessment released in July 2009 suggests that global growth would 
contract by 1.4 per cent in 2009, and the volume of world trade would also decline by 
12.1 per cent. The recovery is widely perceived to be gradual, and even with the 
upward revision to the IMFís growth outlook for 2010 at 2.5 per cent, that would 
represent just about half of the growth achieved in 2007. Moreover, despite diminishing 
uncertainty and improving confidence as well as receding financial stress, bank lending 
conditions remain tight, housing markets are yet to bottom out, and banksí balance 
sheets need to be cleansed further. In the second quarter of 2009, while the rate of 
contraction in the US and Euro-area GDP slowed down significantly, Japan, Hong 
Kong, Germany and France recovered from the recession, and China and Korea 
exhibited acceleration in growth. Emerging signs of improvement in the global macro-
financial conditions, however, need to gain roots for ensuring a sustained global 
recovery.  
 
The assessments of different international agencies indicate that trade, capital 
flows and remittances may take some time to revive to normal levels and contribute to 
growth. If the protectionist response of some countries continues, global recovery may 
not immediately lead to corresponding revival in world trade. Moreover, rebalancing of 
the global growth to correct the accumulated global imbalances of the past years may 
also affect the growth prospects of many countries. 
  
Return to the High Growth Trajectory 
 
Reverting to the high growth path at the earliest and ensuring an inclusive 
growth process represent the overarching priorities of the Government, and the 
macroeconomic policy environment has to respond to this broad overall objective. As 
external demand operates as a major drag on the recovery, growth impulses have to 
depend even more on domestic demand than in the past and public expenditure has to 
take the lead in boosting aggregate demand in the face of deceleration in private 
consumption demand and investment demand. This realisation is reflected in the 
increase in government expenditure by 33.1 per cent in 2008-09 and by 13.3 per cent 
over the high base of the previous year, as budgeted for 2009-10. 
  
Domestic Savings and Investment 
 
The relatively higher resilience of Indian growth to the global economic crisis was 
on account of the dominant role of domestic demand and domestic saving. The 
increase in savings rate from 23.5 per cent in 2001-02 to 37.7 per cent in 2007-08 
largely allowed a sustainable investment driven high average growth of 8.8 per cent 
over 2003-08, besides the congenial productivity enhancing influence of reforms. In the 
process of reverting to the high growth path, same level of support from domestic 
saving may be required, which, however, may be difficult in the immediate run due to 
the operation of two factors. Public sector savings, which had been showing signs of 
improvement in recent years reflecting the disciplining influence of the FRBM, is 
expected to register some deterioration due to higher fiscal deficits as the outcome of 
using appropriate fiscal stimulus to contain the slowdown in growth, besides the 
expected subdued performance of the public sector enterprises in a phase of economic 
slowdown. Depressed corporate earnings associated with deceleration in aggregate 
demand could also lead to some erosion in savings of the private sector. 
  
 
  5
Aggregate Demand 
 
The composition of aggregate demand had to tilt in favour of government 
demand, on account of the use of fiscal stimulus to contain the growth slowdown. In 
view of the payments made under the Farmer Debt Waiver Scheme, Sixth Pay 
Commission and fiscal stimulus measures, the share of government final consumption 
increased to over 11.1 per cent of GDP in 2008-09 from 9.8 per cent of GDP in the 
previous year. The revival in private consumption demand, however, is essential to not 
only stimulate investment demand but also to facilitate faster fiscal consolidation. 
  
Agricultural and Allied Activities 
 
The agricultural growth prospects in 2009-10 have to be assessed taking into 
account the output impact of deficient monsoon. With almost 60 per cent of the 
agricultural land being rain-fed, Indian agriculture is still dependent on the performance 
of the monsoon, particularly the South-West monsoon. According to the August 2009 
revised monsoon rainfall projections of the India Meteorological Department (IMD), the 
rainfall deficiency in 2009 (during June-September) could be about 13 per cent. The 
actual position up to the second week of August 2009 shows that the cumulative 
shortage of rainfall is about 29 per cent in relation to the normal levels. Moreover, 
production weighted rainfall index of the Reserve Bank shows a shortfall of 36 per cent, 
which is higher than what is indicated by the cumulative rainfall pattern. 
 
Industrial Sector 
 
Despite positive growth and signs of recovery in the first quarter of 2009-10, the 
growth outlook for the industrial sector remains mixed. In view of the prevailing 
uncertainties, the Reserve Bank has set up an Industry Monitoring Group drawing 
members from external agencies as well as from concerned departments of the Bank in 
April 2009 to periodically assess the developments in Industry in relation to changes 
taking place in the global economy and the financial sector. 
 
Services Sector 
 
This sector has not only exhibited minimum growth of 9 per cent in the recent 
five years, but its share in aggregate GDP has also increased to about 64.5 per cent. 
Historically, the services sector has consistently showed resilience since 1990-91. The 
current global economic crisis being unprecedented in the recent history in terms of the 
magnitude of the impact as well its duration, the past resilience of the services sector 
could be tested in 2009-10.  
 
Growth Outlook 
 
The Reserve Bankís survey of professional forecasters conducted in June 2009 
indicated an upward revision in the median growth outlook to 6.5 per cent from the 
earlier outlook of 5.7 per cent as per the previous Survey conducted in March 2009.  
 
Taking into account the global developments as well as the developments in 
domestic aggregate demand and the recent output outlook for the three broad 
constituent components of GDP (i.e. agriculture, industry and services), the first 
quarterly review of the monetary policy for 2009-10 conducted on July 28, 2009 placed 
GDP growth for 2009-10 at ì6.0 per cent with an upward biasî. 
 
Since the presentation of the policy statement, while the extent of rainfall 
deficiency associated with the South West monsoon has increased, the IIP figures for 
June 2009 released in August 2009 show significant recovery in industrial output.  
 
  6
Inflation Outlook 
 
In 2008-09, India witnessed large volatility in headline inflation, which exceeded 
12 per cent at one point and then fell to below 1 per cent by the end of the year. Since 
June 2009, year-on-year WPI inflation has remained negative, primarily reflecting the 
high base effect of the previous year that resulted from significant increases in the 
prices of food and international commodities in the first half of 2008-09. The base effect 
could be expected to fade gradually and then disappear by October 2009, after which 
the positive WPI inflation will become visible. 
  
While WPI inflation has turned negative, other indicators of inflation based on 
CPI for June 2009 (point-to-point) continue to remain high at 11.5 per cent (for CPI-AL), 
11.3 per cent (for CPI-RL), 9.6 per cent (for CPI-UNME) and 9.3 per cent (for CPI-IW). 
The significant divergent behaviour of the inflation is largely on account of the 
differences in the coverage of items and their weights in the WPI and CPI. At the 
disaggregated level, even within the WPI, inflation in food articles and essential 
commodities remain close to the inflation as per different indices of CPI. Moreover, 
inflation expectations have not declined as much as the fall in WPI inflation and 
expansionary fiscal stance with an accommodative monetary policy may not lead to 
sobering of inflation expectations, even if the headline inflation remains negative for a 
few months. 
  
The first quarter review of monetary policy conducted in July 2009 revised the 
inflation projection for the end of the year to 5 per cent from 4 per cent projected in April 
2009, recognising the imminent signs of inflationary pressures, while highlighting the 
medium-term objective of 3.0 per cent inflation.  
 
The External Sector Outlook 
 
 The outlook for the external sector suggests that despite persistence of the 
global recession in 2009, the external sector is unlikely to cause concern for growth and 
stability in India. The latest available trends for 2009-10 indicate that current account 
deficit as percentage of GDP would be lower than that in 2008-09. Both exports and 
imports continued to decline in the first quarter of 2009-10, but the decline in imports 
has been sharper than the decline in exports, resulting in a narrowing down of trade 
deficit. However, global oil prices have increased in recent months, which, if sustained, 
may put some pressure on the trade and current account deficits. The relative stability 
in the software services exports and inward workersí remittances, as witnessed in the 
previous year, could impart resilience to the current account in 2009-10. Even though 
net capital flows to EMEs are expected to decline during 2009, capital flows to India 
may increase because of better medium-term growth and faster recovery prospects. 
Early indications for the first quarter of 2009-10 suggest that NRI deposits, FII portfolio 
inflows and inward FDI flows have generally been strong, as against the net capital 
outflows witnessed in the last two quarters of 2008-09.  
 
Fiscal Consolidation 
 
The fiscal stance of the Government in the face of deteriorating global conditions 
and weakening domestic growth impulses was guided by the need for preventing a 
sharp contraction in growth in both 2008-09 and 2009-10, while recognising the need to 
revert to the path of fiscal consolidation as soon as possible. 
  
The quality of fiscal consolidation has to be given priority attention in view of the 
fact that even the post-FRBM improvements in key deficit indicators were possible 
primarily on account of the revenue buoyancy. The fiscal consolidation path may have 
to involve considerable and careful rationalisation of expenditure. A ceiling on the share  7
of non-plan expenditure in total expenditure may be integrated into a medium-term plan 
for enhancing the quality of fiscal consolidation. Moreover, improving the productivity of 
public expenditure and quality of the public service should also be emphasised as an 
important part of the initiatives on expenditure-led fiscal consolidation.  
 
Subsidies 
 
Management of subsidy has posed a persistent policy challenge. The high 
fertiliser prices prevailing in global commodity markets during the first half of 2008-09 
and the enhanced minimum support price for wheat and rice led to sharp increases in 
fertiliser and food subsidies in 2008-09 (RE) by Rs.44,863 crore and Rs.10,960 crore, 
respectively, over the budget estimates. Apart from these subsidies, which are explicitly 
provided for in the Budget, implicit subsidies provided for by way of issue of special 
securities to oil and fertiliser companies amounted to Rs.75,849 crore and Rs.20,000 
crore, respectively, in 2008-09 so as to compensate for under recoveries. This has 
added to the subsidy burden of the Government. Without explicit mandated provisions 
to cap expenditure on subsidies, need for greater public investment in infrastructure, 
both physical and social, could be sacrificed as an outcome associated with higher 
subsidies.  
 
Infrastructure 
 
Indiaís high growth trajectory has exerted significant pressures on the available 
physical infrastructure, and infrastructure deficit is widely recognised as a major 
constraint to attracting foreign investment and promoting efficiency in production in 
India. Public investment continues to dominate the infrastructure sector in India and 
when the Government is expected to go through an exit phase to revert to the fiscal 
consolidation path, accelerating the pace of public expenditure for infrastructure could 
become difficult. In attracting private investment to infrastructure projects, the challenge 
is to make the investment attractive enough in terms of expected return on capital while 
also being fair to the consumers and actual users of the infrastructure. Moreover, 
besides the current focus on growth, improving the quality of life through provision of 
modern physical and social infrastructure should also be given greater importance. 
 
Technology and Innovations 
 
For sustaining the high growth, there has to be significant emphasis on raising 
the productivity levels, for which innovations and adoption of technology would be 
critical. Factors ranging from education, rule of law, openness to trade and capital flows 
and institutional reforms could contribute to technological progress, besides innovations 
and adoption of new technology. For enhancing productivity, thus, expenditure on 
primary health, education, vocational training and R&D may be raised, besides 
facilitating larger flow of credit. Entrepreneurship needs to be incentivised for promotion 
of innovations.  
 
Food and Energy Security 
 
The global developments on the food and energy fronts in 2008 highlighted the 
importance of food and energy security for ensuring sustainable and inclusive high 
growth in India. Insulating the common man from the vulnerability associated with high 
food price inflation warrants a more robust food security system in India, which could 
allow high growth in agriculture without depressing the prices too much while also 
preventing escalation in food prices in the eventuality of production shortfalls.  
 
The behaviour of energy prices in 2008-09 highlights the urgency that should be 
assigned to the issue of energy security. Significant dependence on imports for 
ensuring assured supply of POL products in the domestic market warrants adequate  8
strategic policies to contain any potential risk to future growth path arising from possible 
emergence of sudden deficits in energy availability. Incentives to private investment 
and higher public investment on exploration and production of crude and natural gas 
would be necessary. Any fiscal measures to moderate the impact of high oil prices over 
a sustained period could drag the fiscal position to unsustainable levels. Decontrol of 
prices for all POL products by linking the pricing directly to international prices, and 
delivering subsidies explicitly as a cash outgo affecting the budget deficit 
contemporaneously, instead of through oil bonds, could be the first step towards 
promoting energy security. The next important steps could involve provision of sufficient 
fiscal incentives for promoting energy conservation and efficient use, for attracting 
private investment in generation and conservation of power, and more importantly, 
research and extension activities on non-conventional clean energy.  
 
Employment 
  
The employment effects of the global economic recession have been a key 
driving factor behind the use of large stimulus packages all over the world. While no 
information is available at the macro-level in India on the unemployment scenario 
arising from the slowdown in growth, unemployment very much remains a concern, and 
there are evidences of some increase in unemployment in certain sectors.  
 
Financial Sector Reforms 
 
While Indiaís financial sector remained resilient in the face of global shocks, 
there are a number of areas where the reforms would be needed to promote stability 
and generate growth impulses for the real economy. An important challenge is to 
channelise more savings to the financial system, particularly in rural areas and from the 
urban informal sector. This would need further penetration of the banking system. The 
Reserve Bankís emphasis on financial inclusion is important in attaining this objective 
over time. Further reduction in the cost of banking services may require greater 
competition among product lines, improved delivery mechanisms and increasing use of 
information technology.  
 
With a view to ensuring that domestic savings could finance long-term 
investment in projects having long gestation lags, the insurance and pension sectors, 
would be critical, due to the very nature of their liabilities, as well as a vibrant bond 
market.  
 
Cross-border banking, in the post crisis period, has to be examined with greater 
caution, and future reforms in this area must be guided by progress on adequate 
mechanisms and systems to prevent the possibility of sudden and large external 
contagion creating systemic risks for the domestic financial system. For sustaining the 
high growth path, improving the investment climate and enhancing the absorptive 
capacity would be critical. In this context, financial sector reforms have to emphasise 
promoting financial inclusion, ensuring wide and deep financial markets and facilitating 
the growth of strong, competitive and sound financial institutions.  
 
Financial Stability Architecture 
 
The post-crisis revamping of the architecture for promoting financial stability as a 
precondition to growth could encompass macroeconomic policy issues as well as 
financial regulation and supervision.  
 
In the sphere of monetary policy, alongside the predominant emphasis on 
inflation, asset price bubbles driven by credit boom and excessive use of leverage has 
to receive greater attention. 
   9
The fiscal policy stance has to recognise the limits of pro-cyclical fiscal stance, 
and the importance of adequate fiscal consolidation and sustainability as a necessary 
stimulus to high growth and stability. In the Indian context, adequate fiscal space has to 
be built up as a cushion over time to deal with future shocks to the growth process. 
Leverage driven or export/capital flows dependent growth could increase the 
amplitude of the business cycle and the real costs of an external or financial sector 
shock could be disproportionately high. 
 
In the sphere of regulatory and supervisory architecture, alongside the current 
emphasis on the soundness of individual banks and institutions as a means to ensure 
systemic stability, increasing emphasis has to be laid on macro-prudential regulation 
that could promote and strengthen systemic stability. In view of the interconnectedness 
between banks and institutions, financial markets, and the economy, systemic risk 
analysis would involve interpreting the changing dynamics between these three 
segments on a continuous basis. Any vulnerability in any small segment of these broad 
areas could amplify and become systemic in view of the strong inter-linkages. The 
emerging international standards and best practices would have to be carefully 
examined from the stand point of their relevance to India, while further strengthening 
the domestic financial stability framework to avoid systemic stress on the financial 
system. 
 
POLICY CHALLENGES 
 
The macroeconomic conditions in 2009-10 so far and the expected outlook for 
growth and inflation suggest that there are clear policy challenges for the Reserve Bank 
as well as for the economy in the near as well as medium-run. 
 
A major near-term challenge for the Reserve Bank is to deal with the unpleasant 
combination of subdued growth with emerging risk of high inflation, which poses a 
complex dilemma on the appropriate stance of monetary policy. In such conditions, 
while withdrawal of monetary accommodation entails the risk of weakening recovery 
impulses, sustained accommodation and the associated protracted phase of high 
money growth can only increase inflation in future.  
 
Secondly, large borrowing programmes and high fiscal deficits complicate the 
challenge even further by accentuating inflationary expectations, which could worsen 
the actual inflation situation over time while also putting upward pressure on interest 
rates. 
  
Thirdly, for any early signs of recovery to gain momentum, private sector credit 
must grow. Better monetary policy transmission that could enhance the demand for 
credit is a key challenge, notwithstanding the usual dynamics of any credit market 
which may not respond to monetary policy actions.  
 
Finally, with the return of capital inflows to the pre-crisis period and revival in 
demand for credit from the private sector, the costs of any delay in withdrawal of 
monetary accommodation and fiscal consolidation could increase.  
 
For the Reserve Bank, there are other medium-term issues associated with 
globalisation as well international initiatives on revamping the architecture for promoting 
financial stability. While openness offers a number of benefits, it increases the risks 
from external demand and capital flows. Swings in capital flows and sudden stops can 
have a significant impact on exchange rates, domestic monetary and liquidity conditions 
and overall macroeconomic and financial stability.  
 
For promoting financial stability, the new international initiatives in response to 
the global financial crisis have to be monitored and examined, with an emphasis on  10
country-specific relevance, and the future approach to financial sector reforms may 
have to be based on lessons from the recent crisis.  
 
The single mandate linked to inflation objective has often been highlighted as a 
necessity for ensuring a better inflation environment, but given the importance of other 
objectives for a country of Indiaís size and diverse needs, the operational relevance of 
an inflation-centric mandate has to be examined carefully.  
 
The exit options for fiscal policy have to be seen in the context of the fact that 
economic recovery in itself could allow the automatic stabilisers to operate, by raising 
the revenues, and creating scope for reduction in public expenditure. What would be 
more important, however, is the discretionary unwinding measures to ensure reverting 
to the fiscal consolidation path as an essential requirement for returning to the high 
growth path.  
 
 For the economy as a whole, the most critical challenge is to revert to the high 
growth path, which would be possible only with a faster recovery. The longer the growth 
impulses remain dampened, the fiscal policy will exhaust any available fiscal space, 
and the costs of large fiscal stimulus will also increase with time.  
 
Deficient monsoon and the possible adverse effects on agricultural output may 
not only put pressure on food prices but also increase the demand for more subsidies 
and relief measures. The pressure on the fiscal situation could only increase if drought 
related policy response involves further expansion in government expenditure, and the 
additional costs associated with possible import of essential commodities to improve 
domestic supply conditions. Given the fact that food prices remain high, despite low 
overall WPI inflation, and that all CPI indices exhibit little moderation in inflation, the 
supply side of food management would assume critical significance for the 
Government.  
 
The unemployment effects of a long phase of economic slowdown, with weakly 
developed social security system, suggest that the Governmentís preparedness for 
dealing with situations as in 2008-09 should be strengthened, which must include 
counter-cyclical fiscal stance allowing build up of significant cushion during periods of 
high growth. But despite the FRBM, fiscal consolidation process remained slow. More 
importantly, the public expenditure was also not reoriented to address constraints to 
high growth, such as physical and social infrastructure.  
 
The manner in which Indian policies could manage the contagion from the global 
crisis would have further improved the global perception of India. The global crisis, 
when it started to spread, did not differentiate countries on the basis of soundness of 
their macroeconomic policies. In a globalised world, strengthened multilateral 
surveillance and effective global action to prevent the emergence of major global 
imbalances would have to be ensured so as to allow national policies the space for 
pursuing and achieving the high and sustainable growth objectives. 
 
Overall, Indian growth continues to be driven by domestic demand and domestic 
saving, with foreign capital supplementing within the prudent approach to sustainable 
current account deficit. Thus, return to 9 per cent growth trajectory would largely be 
determined by the countryís structural fundamentals and the responsive macro policy 
environment.  
 
 
 
       Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2009-2010/320          Chief General Manager 