  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
December 06, 2008 
RBI's Growth Stimulus 
The global economic outlook has deteriorated sharply over the last two months. In its World 
Economic Outlook, published in early October, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast global 
growth of 3.9 per cent in 2008, and of 3.0 per cent in 2009.  The IMF has since revised its forecast for 
global growth downwards to 3.7 per cent for 2008, and 2.2 per cent for 2009.  Many economists are now 
predicting the worst global recession since the 1970s. Several countries, notably the United States, the UK, 
the euro area and Japan are all officially in recession. More worryingly, current indications are that the 
recession will be deeper and the recovery longer than earlier anticipated.    
 
2. Confidence in global credit markets continues to be low, and credit lines remain clogged.  The tight and 
hesitant conditions in the credit markets are precipitating  erosion of demand which, in turn, is feeding a 
recession - deflation vicious cycle.  Central banks around the world are responding to the developments by 
aggressive and unconventional injection of liquidity, monetary easing and relaxation of collateral norms and 
eligibility criteria for their lending to financial institutions.       
 
3. Contrary to earlier expectations that emerging economies will be affected only marginally, growth 
prospects of emerging economies have most definitely been undermined by the ongoing crisis with, of 
course, considerable variations across countries.  The transmission to emerging economies is taking place 
via both trade and financial channels.   Reflecting the contagion of the crisis, the IMF revised its growth 
forecast for emerging economies for 2009 to 5.1 per cent, down from its early October figure of 6.1 per 
cent.    
 
4. The outlook for India going forward is mixed.  There is evidence of economic activity slowing down.  Real 
GDP growth has moderated in the first half of 2008/09.  Industrial activity, particularly in the manufacturing 
and infrastructure sectors, is decelerating.  The services sector too, which has been our prime growth 
engine for the last five years, is slowing, mainly in construction, transport and communication, trade, hotels 
and restaurants sub-sectors.  For the first time in seven years, exports have declined in absolute terms in 
October.  Recent data indicate that the demand for bank credit is slackening despite comfortable liquidity.  
Higher input costs and dampened demand have dented corporate margins while the uncertainty 
surrounding the crisis has affected business confidence. 
  
5. On the positive side, headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index, has fallen sharply, 
and the decline has been sustained for the past four weeks, pointing to a faster than expected reduction in 
inflation.  Clearly, falling commodity prices have been the key drivers behind the disinflation; however, 
some contribution has also come from slowing domestic demand. The reduction in prices of petrol and 
diesel announced last night should further ease inflationary pressures. To be sure, consumer price inflation 
for the months of September and October did increase. This is possibly owing to the firm trend in food 
articles inflation and the higher weight of food articles in measures of consumer price inflation. Historically 
there has been a correlation between wholesale and consumer price inflation, and given this correlation, 
consumer price inflation too can be expected to soften in the months ahead.   
 6. In response to the evolving global and domestic developments, the Reserve Bank has taken a number 
of measures since mid-September 2008.  The aim of these measures was to augment domestic and forex 
liquidity and to enable banks to continue to lend for productive purpose while maintaining credit quality so 
as to sustain the growth momentum.   
 
7.  Measures aimed at expanding rupee liquidity included significant reduction in the cash reserve ratio 
(CRR), reduction of the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR), a special repo window under the liquidity adjustment 
facility (LAF) for banks for on lending to non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), housing finance 
companies (HFCs) and mutual funds (MFs), and a special refinance facility which banks can access 
without any collateral.  The Reserve Bank is also unwinding the Market Stabilization Scheme (MSS) 
securities roughly synchronised with the Government borrowing programme in order to manage liquidity.  
 
8. Measures aimed at managing forex liquidity include upward adjustment of the interest rate ceilings on 
the foreign currency non-resident (banks) [FCNR(B)] and non-resident (external) rupee account [NR(E)RA] 
deposits, substantially relaxing the external commercial borrowings (ECB) regime, allowing NBFCs/HFCs 
access to foreign borrowing and allowing corporates to buy back  foreign currency convertible bonds 
(FCCBs) to take advantage of the discount in the prevailing depressed global markets.  The Reserve Bank 
has also instituted a rupee-dollar swap facility for banks with overseas branches to give them comfort in 
managing their short-term funding requirements.  
 
9. Measures to encourage flow of credit to sectors which are coming under pressure include extending the 
period of pre-shipment and post-shipment credit for exports, expanding the refinance facility for exports, 
contra-cyclical adjustment of provisioning norms for all types of standard assets (except in case of direct 
advances to agriculture and small and medium enterprises which continue to be 0.25 per cent) and risk 
weights on banks' exposure to certain sectors which had been increased earlier counter-cyclically, and 
expanding the lendable resources available to the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and 
the National Housing Bank (NHB).    
 
10. To improve the flow of credit to productive sectors at viable costs so as to sustain the growth 
momentum, the Reserve Bank signaled a lowering of the interest rate structure by reducing its key policy 
repo rate by 150 basis points from 9.0 per cent as on October 19 to 7.5 per cent by November 3, 2008.  
 
11. Taken together, the measures put in place since mid-September 2008 have ensured that the Indian 
financial markets continue to function in an orderly manner.  The cumulative amount of primary liquidity 
made available to the financial system through these measures is over Rs.300,000 crore.  This sizeable 
easing has ensured a comfortable liquidity position starting mid- November 2008 as evidenced by a 
number of indicators.  Since November 18, the LAF window has largely been in the absorption mode.  The 
weighted average call money rate has come down from a recent high of 19.7 per cent on October 10 to 6.1 
per cent on December 5.  The overnight money market rate has consistently remained within the LAF 
corridor (6.0 per cent to 7.5 per cent) since November 3. The yield on the 10 year benchmark G-Sec has 
declined from 8.6 per cent on September 29 to 6.8 per cent on December 5.  Taking the signal from the 
repo rate cut, the top five public sector banks have reduced their benchmark prime lending rates (BPLR) 
from 13.75 – 14.00 per cent as on October 1 to 13.00 – 13.50 per cent presently.  
 
12. The Reserve Bank has reviewed the evolving macroeconomic and monetary/liquidity conditions and 
has decided to take the following further measures: 
 
• It has been decided to reduce the repo rate under the LAF by 100 basis points from 7.5 per 
cent to 6.5 per cent and the reverse repo rate by 100 basis points from 6.0 per cent to 5.0 
per cent, effective December 8, 2008.  
 
• In view of the need to enhance credit delivery to the employment- intensive micro and small 
enterprises (MSE) sector, it has been decided to provide refinance of an amount of Rs. 
7,000 crore to the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) under the provisions 
of Section 17(4H) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. This refinance will be available against: (i) the SIDBI’s incremental direct lending to MSE; and (ii) the SIDBI’s loans to 
banks, NBFCs and State Financial Corporations (SFCs) against the latter’s incremental 
loans and advances to MSEs. The incremental loans and advances will be computed with 
reference to outstandings as on September 30, 2008. The facility will be available at the 
prevailing repo rate under the LAF for a period of 90 days. During this 90-day period, the 
amount can be flexibly drawn and repaid. At the end of the 90-day period, the drawal can 
also be rolled over. This refinance facility will be available up to March 31, 2010. The 
utilisation of funds will be governed by the policy approved by the Board of the SIDBI.  
 
• We are working on a similar refinance facility for the National Housing Bank (NHB) of an 
amount of Rs 4, 000 crore. We will announce the details after consideration of the proposal 
by the Central Board of the Reserve Bank which is meeting next week. 
 
• On November 15, 2008, the Reserve Bank had announced that proposals by Indian 
companies for premature buyback of foreign currency convertible bonds (FCCBs) would be 
considered under the approval route, provided that the buyback is financed by the 
company's foreign currency resources held in India or abroad and/or out of fresh external 
commercial borrowings (ECBs) raised in conformity with the current norms for ECBs. 
Extension of FCCBs was also permitted at the current all-in cost for the relevant maturity. 
On a review, it has now been decided to permit Authorized Dealers Category - I banks to 
consider applications for premature buyback of FCCBs from their customers, where the 
source of funds for the buyback is: i) foreign currency resources held in India (including 
funds held in EEFC accounts) or abroad     and/or ii) fresh ECB raised in conformity with the 
current ECB norms, provided there is a minimum discount of 15 per cent on the book value 
of the FCCB. In addition, the Reserve Bank will consider applications for buyback of FCCBs 
out of rupee resources provided that: (i) there is a minimum discount of 25 per cent on the 
book value; (ii) the amount of the buyback is limited to US $ 50 million of the redemption 
value per company; and (iii) the resources for buyback are drawn out of internal accruals of 
the company as certified by the statutory auditor.  
 
• It has been decided that loans granted by banks to Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) for 
on-lending to individuals for purchase/construction of dwelling units may be classified under 
priority sector, provided the housing loans granted by HFCs do not exceed Rs.20 lakh per 
dwelling unit per family. However, the eligibility under this measure will be restricted to five 
per cent of the individual bank’s total priority sector lending. This special dispensation will 
apply to loans granted by banks to HFCs up to March 31, 2010.  
 
• Under the current guidelines, exposures to commercial real estate, capital market exposures 
and personal/ consumer loans are not eligible for the exceptional regulatory treatment of 
retaining the asset classification of the restructured standard accounts in standard category.  
As the real estate sector is facing difficulties, it has been decided to extend exceptional/ 
concessional treatment to the commercial real estate exposures which are restructured up 
to June 30, 2009.   
 
•  In the face of the current economic downturn, there are likely to be more instances of even 
viable units facing temporary cash flow problems. To address this problem, it has been 
decided, as a one time measure, that the second restructuring done by banks of exposures 
(other than exposures to commercial real estate, capital market exposures and personal/ 
consumer loans) up to June 30, 2009, will also be eligible for exceptional regulatory 
treatment.  
 • In view of the difficulties faced by exporters on account of the weakening of external 
demand, it was decided that the interest rate on Post-shipment Rupee Export Credit up to 
180 days will not exceed BPLR minus 2.5 percentage points. In respect of overdue bills, 
banks have been permitted to charge the rates fixed for Export Credit Not Otherwise 
Specified (ECNOS) for the period beyond the due date. It has now been decided that the 
prescribed interest rate as applicable to post shipment rupee export credit (not exceeding  
BPLR minus 2.5 percentage points) may also be extended to  overdue bills up to 180 days 
from the date of advance.   
 
13. Operational instructions covering the above measures will be issued separately.   
 
14. The cumulative impact of the measures in today's package, together with earlier measures, should be 
to step up demand and arrest the growth moderation. In particular, the reduction in the repo/reverse repo 
rates should result in a reduction in the marginal cost of funds to banks and enable them to improve the 
flow of credit to productive sectors of the economy on viable terms. The liquidity support provided to the 
SIDBI under the refinancing arrangement is expected to alleviate the credit stress/tightening of lending 
conditions confronting micro and small enterprises and should revive activity in these employment-
intensive drivers of growth. The facility for premature buyback of FCCBs will help Indian companies to take 
advantage of the current discounted rates at which their FCCBs are trading. The special dispensation for 
treating loans to HFCs as priority sector lending will boost lending to the housing sector. The facilities for 
restructuring exposures will help soften pressures being faced by the commercial real estate and other 
sectors in the current environment. The benefit of the concessional rate of interest available to the 
exporters up to 180 days irrespective of the original maturity of the  export bills is intended to benefit 
exporters who have drawn bills for shorter maturities and are facing difficulties in realizing the bills on due 
dates on account of external problems. 
 
15. Given the uncertain outlook on the global crisis, it is difficult to precisely anticipate every development. 
The Reserve Bank will continue to closely monitor the developments in the global and domestic financial 
markets and will take swift and effective action as appropriate. The Reserve Bank's policy endeavour will 
be to minimise the negative impact of the crisis and to ensure an orderly adjustment.  In particular, we will 
try to maintain a comfortable liquidity position, see that the weighted average overnight money market rate 
is maintained within the repo-reverse repo corridor and ensure conditions conducive for flow of credit to 
productive sectors, particularly the stressed export and small and medium industry sectors.  
 
16. The fundamentals of our economy continue to be strong.  Once the crisis is behind us, and calm and 
confidence are restored in the global markets, economic activity in India will recover sharply.  But a period 
of painful adjustment is inevitable.   
 
Sabeeta Badkar  
Assistant Manager 
Press Release : 2008-2009/842 
Related Press Releases/Notifications: 
1.RBI announces Further Measures for Monetary and Liquidity Management  
2.Special Fixed Rate Repo Under Liquidity Adjustment Facility  
3.Temporary liquidity support for financing agricultural operations 
4.Special Refinance Facility (SRF) under Section 17(3B) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
5.Trade Credits for Imports into India – Review of all-in-cost ceiling 
6.Enhancement of NBFCs’ capital raising option for capital adequacy purposes  
7.Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits and FCNR(B) deposits 
8.Short-term Foreign Currency Borrowings by Housing Finance Companies 
9.Export Credit Refinance Facility: Relaxation 
10.Review of Prudential Norms – Provisioning for Standard Assets and Risk Weights for  
Exposures to Corporates, Commercial Real Estate and NBFC- ND-SI 
11. Standing Liquidity Facilities for Banks and Primary Dealers  
12. Interest Rate on Special Refinance Facility 