  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
September 19, 2008  
 
Mobile Banking Transactions in India - Operative Guidelines for Banks 
 
Based on the comments received from public the Reserve Bank of India 
has modified its earlier draft operating guidelines on mobile payments in India. 
The modified  guidelines  are  now  placed on  the website.   Comments if any 
can be    e-mailed or faxed to 022-22691557 or letter addressed to Chief General 
Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Payment and Settlement 
Systems, Central Office, 14th floor, Central Office Building, SBS Marg, Mumbai 
400001 latest by September 29, 2008. The earlier draft guidelines were placed 
on the Reserve Bank website on June 12, 2008. 
 
 
      Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
Press Release : 2008-2009/359 
   
Mobile Banking transactions in India - Operative Guidelines for Banks 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 Mobile phones as a delivery channel for extending banking services have off-late been 
attaining greater significance. The rapid growth in users and wider coverage of mobile 
phone networks have made this channel an important platform for extending banking 
services to customers. With the rapid growth in the number of  mobile phone subscribers 
in India (about  261 million as at the end of March 2008 and growing at about 8 million a 
month), banks have been exploring the feasibility of using mobile phones as an 
alternative channel of delivery of banking services.  Some banks have started offering 
information based services like balance enquiry, stop payment instruction of cheques, 
transactions enquiry, location of the nearest ATM/branch etc. Acceptance of transfer of 
funds instruction for credit to beneficiaries of same/or another bank in favor of pre-
registered beneficiaries have also commenced in a few banks. In order to ensure a level 
playing field and considering that the technology is relatively new, Reserve Bank has 
brought out a set of operating guidelines for adoption by banks.   
 
1.2 For the purpose of these Guidelines, “mobile banking transactions” is undertaking 
banking transactions using mobile phones by bank customers that involve credit/debit to 
their accounts. It also covers accessing the bank accounts by customers for non-
monetary transactions like balance enquiry etc.  
 
2. Regulatory & Supervisory Issues 
 
2.1 Only banks which are licensed and supervised in India and have a physical presence in 
India will be permitted to offer mobile banking services.  
 
2.2 The services shall be restricted only to customers of banks and holders of debit/credit 
cards issued as per the extant Reserve Bank of India guidelines.   
 
2.3 Only Indian Rupee based domestic services shall be provided. Use of mobile banking 
services for cross border transfers is strictly prohibited. 
 
2.4 Banks may also use the services of Business Correspondent appointed in compliance 
with RBI guidelines, for extending this facility to their customers. 
 
2.5 The guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank on ‘Risks and Controls in Computers and 
Telecommunications’ vide circular DBS.CO.ITC.BC. 10/ 31.09.001/ 97-98 dated 4th 
February 1998 will apply mutatis mutandis to mobile banking.  
 
2.6 The guidelines issued by Reserve Bank on “Know Your Customer (KYC)”, “Anti  Money 
Laundering (AML)” and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) from time to time 
would be applicable to mobile based banking services also.  
 
2.7 Only banks who have implemented core banking solutions would be permitted to provide 
mobile banking services. 
 
2.8 Banks shall file Suspected Transaction Report (STR) to Financial Intelligence Unit – 
India (FID-IND) for mobile banking transactions as in the case of normal banking 
transactions. 
   
 
3. Registration of customers for mobile service 
 
3.1 Banks shall put in place a system of document based registration with mandatory 
physical presence of their customers, before commencing mobile banking service. 
 
3.2 On registration of the customer, the full details of the Terms and Conditions of the 
service offered shall be communicated to the customer. 
 
4 Technology and Security Standards 
 
4.1 Information Security is most critical to the business of mobile banking services and its 
underlying operations. Therefore, technology used for mobile banking must be secure 
and should ensure confidentiality, integrity, authenticity and non-repudiability.  An 
illustrative, but not exhaustive framework is given at Annex-I. 
 
5. Inter-operability 
 
5.1 Banks offering mobile banking service must ensure that customers having mobile 
phones of any network operator is in a position to avail of the service. Restriction, if any, 
to the customers of particular mobile operator(s) is permissible only during the initial 
stages of offering the service, up to a maximum period of six months subject to review. 
 
 5.2 The long term goal of mobile banking framework in India would be to enable funds 
transfer from account in one bank to any other account in the same or any other bank on 
a real time basis irrespective of the mobile network a customer has subscribed to. This 
would require inter-operability between mobile banking service providers and banks and 
development of a host of message formats. To ensure inter-operability between banks, 
and between their mobile banking service providers banks shall adopt the message 
formats like ISO 8583, with suitable modification to address specific needs.   
  
 
6. Clearing and Settlement for inter-bank funds transfer transactions 
 
6.1 To meet the objective of a nation-wide mobile banking framework, facilitating inter-bank 
settlement, a robust clearing and settlement infrastructure operating on a 24x7 basis 
would be necessary. Pending creation of such a national infrastructure, banks may enter 
into bilateral or multilateral arrangement for inter-bank settlements, with express 
permission from Reserve Bank of India, wherever necessary.  
 
 
7.         Customer Complaints and Grievance Redressal Mechanism  
 
7.1 The customer /consumer protection issues assume a special significance in view of the 
fact that the delivery of banking services through mobile phones is relatively new. Some 
of the key issues in this regard are given at Annex-II. 
   
 
8. Transaction limit 
 
8.1 A per transaction limit of Rs. 2500/- shall be imposed on all Mobile Banking transactions. 
Subject to an overall cap of Rs. 5000/- per day, per customer.  
 
8.2 Banks may also put in place monthly transaction limit depending on the bank’s own risk 
perception of the customer. 
 
9. Board approval  
 
9.1 Approval of the Board of Directors (Local Board in case of foreign banks) for the product 
as also the related security policies must be obtained before launching the scheme.  
 
 
10. Approval of Reserve Bank of India 
 
10.1 Banks wishing to provide mobile banking services shall seek prior one time approval of 
the Reserve Bank of India, by furnishing full details of the proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Annex- I 
 
Technology and Security Standards 
 
1. The security controls/guidelines mentioned in this document are only indicative. However, it 
must be recognised, the technology deployed is fundamental to safety and soundness of any 
payment system. Therefore, banks are required to follow the Security Standards appropriate to 
the complexity of services offered, subject to following the minimum standards set out in this 
document. The guidelines should be applied in a way that is appropriate to the risk associated 
with services provided by the bank and the system which supports these services. 
 
2. Banks are required to put in place appropriate risk mitigation measures like transaction limit 
(per transaction, daily, weekly, monthly), transaction velocity limit, fraud checks, AML checks 
etc. depending on the bank’s own risk perception, unless otherwise mandated by the Reserve 
Bank. 
 
3. Authentication 
 
Banks providing mobile banking services shall comply with the following security principles and 
practices for  the authentication of mobile banking transactions: 
 
a) All mobile banking shall be permitted only by validation through a two factor 
authentication.    
 
b) One of the factors of authentication shall be mPIN or any higher standard. 
 
c) Where mPIN is used, end to end encryption of the mPIN shall be ensured,  
i.e  mPIN shall not be in clear text anywhere in the network.   
 
d) The mPIN shall be stored in a secure environment. 
 
4. Proper level of encryption and security shall be implemented at all stages of the transaction 
processing. The endeavor shall be to ensure end-to-end encryption of the mobile banking 
transaction. Adequate safe guards would also be put in place to guard against the use of mobile 
banking in money laundering, frauds etc. The following guidelines with respect to network and 
system security shall be adhered to: 
 
a) Implement application level encryption over network and transport layer 
encryption wherever possible. 
 
b) Establish proper firewalls, intruder detection systems (IDS), data file and 
system integrity checking, surveillance and incident response procedures 
and containment procedures. 
 
c) Conduct periodic risk management analysis, security vulnerability 
assessment of the application and network etc at least once in a year. 
 
d) Maintain proper and full documentation of security practices, guidelines, 
methods and procedures used in mobile banking and payment systems 
and keep them up to date based on the periodic risk management, 
analysis and vulnerability assessment carried out.   
 
e) Implement appropriate physical security measures to protect the system 
gateways, network equipments, servers, host computers, and other 
hardware/software used from unauthorized access and tampering. The 
Data Centre of the Bank and Service Providers should have proper wired 
and wireless data network protection mechanisms. 
 
5. The dependence of banks on mobile banking service providers may place knowledge of bank 
systems and customers in a public domain. Mobile banking system may also make the banks 
dependent on small firms ( i.e mobile banking service providers) with high employee turnover. It 
is therefore imperative that sensitive customer data, and security and integrity of transactions 
are protected. It is necessary  that the mobile banking servers at the bank’s end or at the mobile 
banking service provider’s end, if any, should be certified by an, accredited external agency. In 
addition, banks should conduct regular information security audits on the mobile banking 
systems to ensure complete security.  
 
6. For channels which do not contain the phone number as identity, a separate login ID and 
password shall be provided to ensure proper authentication.  Internet Banking login IDs and 
Passwords shall  not be allowed to be used for mobile banking.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Annex-II 
 
 
Customer Protection Issues 
 
1. Any security procedure adopted by banks for authenticating users needs to be recognized by 
law as a substitute for signature. In India, the Information Technology Act, 2000, provides for a 
particular technology  as a means of authenticating electronic record. Any other method used by 
banks for authentication is a source of legal risk. Customers must be made aware of the said 
legal risk prior to sign up. 
 
2. Banks are required to maintain secrecy and confidentiality of customers' accounts. In the 
mobile banking scenario, the risk of banks not meeting the above obligation is high. Banks may 
be exposed to enhanced risk of liability to customers on account of breach of secrecy, denial of 
service etc., on account of hacking/ other technological failures. The banks should, therefore, 
institute adequate risk control measures to manage such risks.  
 
3. As in an Internet banking scenario, in the mobile banking scenario too, there is very limited or 
no stop-payment privileges for mobile banking transactions since it becomes impossible for the 
banks to stop payment in spite of receipt of stop payment instruction as the transactions are 
completely instantaneous and are incapable of being reversed.  Hence, banks offering mobile 
banking should notify the customers the timeframe and the circumstances in which any stop-
payment instructions could be accepted. 
 
4. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 defines the rights of consumers in India and is applicable 
to banking services as well. Currently, the rights and liabilities of customers availing of mobile 
banking services are being determined by bilateral agreements between the banks and 
customers. Taking into account the risks arising out of unauthorized transfer through hacking, 
denial of service on account of technological failure etc. banks providing mobile banking would 
need to assess the liabilities arising out of such events and take appropriate counter measures 
like insuring themselves against such risks, as in the case with internet banking.  
 
5. Bilateral contracts drawn up between the payee and payee’s bank, the participating banks 
and service provider should clearly define the rights and obligations of each party.   
 
6. Banks are required to make mandatory disclosures of risks, responsibilities and liabilities of 
the customers on their websites and/or through printed material. 
 
7. The existing mechanism for handling customer complaints / grievances may be used for 
mobile banking transactions as well. However, in view of the fact that the technology is relatively 
new, banks should set up a help desk and disclose the details of the help desk and escalation 
procedure for lodging the complaints, on their websites. Such details should also be made 
available to the customer at the time of sign up. 
 
8. In cases where the customer files a complaint with the bank disputing a transaction, it would 
be the responsibility of the service providing bank, to expeditiously redress the complaint. Banks 
may put in place procedures for addressing such customer grievances. The grievance handling 
procedure including the compensation policy should be disclosed. 
 
9. Customers complaints / grievances arising out of mobile banking facility would be covered 
under the Banking Ombudsman Scheme 2006 (as amended up to May 2007). 
 
10. The jurisdiction of legal settlement would be within India. 
 
 