  
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú 
PRESS RELEASE 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸ 
    DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION 
    Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400 001 
 ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
 
ûÅ¸½›¸À 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 91 22 2270 3279 
Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 Fax: 91 22 22703279 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¢£{¸¨¸Ä ¤¸ÿˆÅ 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ À helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
e-mail: helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
April 24, 2008 
 
RBI releases Report of Working Group on  
Rehabilitation of Sick SMEs 
 
The Reserve Bank of India today placed on its website (www.rbi.org.in), the Report of 
the Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick SMEs for wider dissemination and comments. 
Comments on the Report could be sent to the Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Rural 
Planning & Credit Department, Reserve Bank of Insdia, Central Office, Fort, Mumbai-400001 or 
could be e-mailed.   
 
A Working Group was constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, 
Chairman and Managing Director, Punjab National Bank to suggest measures for improving 
credit flow to the SME sector as well as measures for early implementation of 
rehabilitation/nursing of sick SME units by examining feasibility of bringing in additional capital 
through alternative routes, such as, equity participation, venture financing, etc. The Working 
Group held wide ranging discussions with the stakeholders, namely, industry associations, 
banks and Government agencies. The Working Group submitted its report on April 17, 2008. 
 
The Working Group has given various recommendations/measures/actions, which need 
to be taken by banks, NABARD, SIDBI, RBI and State Government for enhancing credit flow to 
the SME sector as well as for early implementation of rehabilitation/nursing of sick SME units.  
 
Highlights: 
• As an incentive for proper restructuring package at the time of rehabilitation, necessary 
support for business restructuring, modernisation, expansion, diversification and 
technological upgradation as may be felt necessary by the lenders may also be encouraged. 
Support schemes like Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme in case of units in other (than 
rural) areas, KVIC Margin Money Scheme (for units in rural areas) may be extended for 
rehabilitation packages also. 
• The State Governments should introduce a Single Window concept for providing relief and 
concessions to sick Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs).  
• In order to incentivise the banks to take rehabilitation measures, the repayment of any 
additional exposure taken as part of the rehabilitation package should be given priority on 
the cash flows as well as security as compared to other debt.  
• The interest of at least six months after commercial production can be included as a part of 
the project cost. Sufficient moratorium say, two years for repayment of the principal should 
also be given so as to prevent cases of incipient sickness at the commencement of 
production and help units to establish themselves in the market at the beginning. .   2
 
• Medium Enterprises should be taken out of the purview of BIFR and the banks given the 
responsibility of their rehabilitation, more so because only a fraction of the medium 
enterprises are covered under Sick Industries Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 
(SICA) and their rehabilitation done under the supervision of BIFR.   
• Raising the limit of Rs 20 lakh to Rs 50 lakh for Lok Adalats, measures to strengthen the 
DRT/legal machinery, dedicated Bench for SMEs to expedite the process of recovery, Asset 
Reconstruction Companies especially for Micro Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) loans 
are some other suggestions of the Working Group.  
 
 
         Alpana Killawala 
          Chief General Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1375 
 