  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
 
September 04, 2008 
 
Report on Currency and Finance- 2006-08 
Theme:  The Banking Sector in India: Emerging Issues and Challenges 
 
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Report on Currency and Finance, 2006-08. 
The theme of this year’s report is “The Banking Sector in India:  Emerging Issues and 
Challenges”. This is in continuation with the theme based Report on Currency and Finance 
introduced by the Reserve Bank in 1998-99. A special mention may be made of the Reports 
brought out in last three years, the themes of which were “The Evolution of Monetary Policy” in 
2003-04 Report, “The Evolution of Central Banking in India” in 2004-05 Report and 
“Development of Financial Markets and the Role of the Central Bank” in 2005-06 Report.  
Along with these three Reports, this Report covers the most of the functions of the Reserve Bank. 
The thrust of the Report is on delineating the various existing and emerging challenges 
faced by the banking sector and suggest measures to address them. The Report, wherever 
possible, has benchmarked the performance/practices of the Indian banking sector against the 
international best practices.  The focus of the report is on scheduled commercial banks, although 
other components of the banking sector, such as urban co-operative banks, regional rural banks, 
have also been dealt with, wherever appropriate and where relevant data are available. Keeping in 
view the magnitude and coverage of this Report, this edition of the Report on Currency and Finance 
is for the period 2006-08 and is being issued in 2 volumes. The Volume I comprises five chapters, 
including a chapter on theme of the Report and Volume II includes 6 chapters, including the overall 
assessment. As a prelude to the theme based discussions, Chapter II titled as ‘Recent Economic 
Developments’ gives an analytical account of the macroeconomic developments of the Indian 
economy during  2007-08 and 2008-09 (up to the latest period for which data wherever possible). 
Chapter III to Chapter X dwell upon the theme based discussions.  
 
Theme of the Report  
The banking system in India has undergone significant transformation following financial 
sector reforms since the early 1990s. The thrust of the banking sector reforms was on increasing 
operational efficiency, strengthening the prudential and supervisory norms, removing external 
constraints, creating competitive conditions and developing the technological and institutional 
infrastructure. The impact of the reform measures is reflected in an improvement in profitability, 
financial health, soundness and overall efficiency of the banking sector. Banks have been able to 
maintain or increase their capital adequacy ratio, despite the sharp increase in their risk-weighted 
assets.   With the entry of new private sector banks and increased presence of foreign banks, the 
Indian banking sector has become more competitive. Public sector banks have also been raising 
capital from the market and are subject to market discipline. Efficiency, productivity and soundness 
of the banking sector improved significantly in the post-reform phase.  Banks have increasingly 
diversified into non-traditional activities, as a result of which several financial conglomerates have 
emerged. This has posed several regulatory and supervisory challenges. Thus, while deregulation 
has opened up new avenues for banks to augment incomes, it has also entailed greater risks. The 
banking sector has witnessed the emergence of new banks, new instruments, new windows, new 
opportunities and, along with all these, there have been new challenges.  
The Report undertakes an in-depth analysis of the various aspects of Indian banking such 
as management of resource mobilisation; management of risk and capital, lending and investment 
operations of banks; financial inclusion; consolidation and competition; efficiency, productivity and 
soundness; and regulatory and supervisory challenges. The thrust of the Report is to critically 
examine the various issues and, going forward, what further needs to be done to ensure the growth 
of the banking sector in a way that supports/accelerates India’s current growth momentum and 
enhances the stability of the financial system. Various measures suggested in this Report set out 
only the broad direction in which reforms in the banking sector could move in future. The pace and 
sequencing of measures would need to be calibrated keeping in view the degree of comfort in 
moving forward in a credible way. 
 
Recent Economic Developments 
The Indian economy continued to record robust growth in 2007-08, although marginally 
lower than the last year. The overall growth momentum, which moderated particularly during the 
second half of the year, was on account of industry and services, offset partially by recovery in 
agriculture. On account of increased kharif foodgrain production, the overall foodgrain production 
during 2007-08 was placed at an all-time high of 230.7 million tonnes. Barring sugarcane and jute & 
mesta, all foodgrains and non-foodgrains were estimated to reach an all-time record production 
during 2007-08.  
During 2008-09 so far (up to August 13, 2008), monsoon conditions have been favourable, 
barring the deficient/scanty rainfall in some regions. The index of industrial production (IIP) 
recorded year-on-year expansion of 5.2 per cent during April-June 2008 as compared with 10.3 per 
cent during April-June 2007. The overall deceleration in industry was mainly on account of the 
manufacturing and electricity sectors. Leading indicators of services sector activity for 2008-09 so 
far ( up to May/June) suggest acceleration in growth in respect of some indicators and deceleration 
in some others. The First Quarter Review of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy for 2008-09 
placed the real GDP growth at around 8.0 per cent for 2008-09.  
Mirroring inflation trends in many advanced as well as emerging economies, various 
measures of inflation in India also hardened significantly since the beginning 2008, reflecting the 
impact of some pass-through of higher international crude oil prices to domestic prices and increase 
in the prices of iron and steel, among others.  According to the First Quarter Review of Monetary 
Policy, the policy endeavour would be to bring down inflation to around 7 per cent by end-March 
2009.  
Indian financial markets remained largely orderly during 2008-09 so far. The Reserve Bank 
managed liquidity with a judicious mix of the available tools, viz, open market operations (OMO), 
including LAF and issuances of securities under MSS and increases in the CRR. Interest rates in 
the money market remained mostly within the informal corridor set by the reverse repo and repo 
rates. Interest rates in the collateralised segment of the money market remained below the call rate. In the foreign exchange market, the Indian rupee generally depreciated against major currencies 
during 2008-09 so far as against the appreciation during 2007-08. During 2008-09 (April to July 
2008), yields remained range bound in the first two months but hardened significantly during June–
July 2008 due to hardening of inflation and soaring international oil prices. The Indian equity 
markets recovered somewhat during April-May 2008, but declined thereafter in tandem with the 
trends in major international equity markets.   
The key deficit indicators of the Central and State Governments are budgeted to decline 
significantly during 2008-09. However, information on Central Government finances for April-June 
2008 indicates some stress on Centre’s fiscal position, particularly in the revenue account. 
India’s balance of payments position remained comfortable during 2007-08, notwithstanding 
a sharp increase in merchandise trade deficit.  However, the current account deficit was contained 
at 1.5 per cent of GDP during the year. Significantly larger net capital inflows over the current 
account deficit resulted in an accretion of US $ 110.5 billion to the foreign exchange reserves during 
2007-08 (US $ 47.6 billion during 2006-07). Trade deficit during April-June 2008-09 was higher by 
US $ 8.9 billion over April-June 2007-08. 
 
Evolution of Banking in India 
Banking in India has a long history and it has evolved over the years passing through 
various phases. The period leading up to Independence was a difficult period for Indian banks. A 
large number of small banks sprang up with low capital base. This period saw the two World Wars 
and the Great Depression of the 1930s. Many banks failed during the period.  Apart from global 
factors, several other factors were also at play.  Partly to address the problem of bank failure, the 
Reserve Bank of India was set up in 1935.  At the time of independence, the entire banking was in 
the private sector. The banking scenario in the early independence phase raised three main 
concerns: (i) bank failures had raised concern regarding the soundness and stability of the banking 
sector; (ii) there was large concentration of resources in a few business families; and (iii) the share 
of agriculture in total bank credit was miniscule. Although the issue of bank failure was addressed, 
two of three major issues at the time of independence continued to raise concern even after 20 
years of independence. Accordingly, with a view to aligning the banking system to the needs of 
planning and economic policy, the policy of social control over the banking sector was adopted in 
1967, which marked the beginning of the next phase.  Fourteen major banks were nationalised in 
1969 and six in 1980. With this, the major segment of the banking sector came under the control of 
the Government. Some other social controls were also implemented such as priority sector lending 
targets.  Massive expansion of branch network that followed improved the banking access 
considerably, especially in rural areas. This helped in mobilising the deposits and stepping up the 
overall savings rate of the economy. The share of credit to agriculture, which constituted a small 
portion for a long time, improved significantly by the end of this phase in 1991-92. However, the 
objective to provide credit at concessional rate led to the administered structure of interest rates 
and other micro controls. Large fiscal deficit by the Government necessitated pre-emption of 
resources by way of CRR and SLR. These factors and the increased focus on priority sector targets 
led to decline in profitability of the banking sector, high NPAs and weakening of the capital base. 
With a view to overcoming several weaknesses that had crept into the system over the years and 
with a view to creating a strong, competitive and vibrant banking system, financial sector reform 
were initiated in the early 1990s, which marked the beginning of the current phase.  Various reform measures resulted in an improvement in profitability, financial health, 
soundness and overall efficiency of the banking sector. With the entry of new private sector banks 
and increased presence of foreign banks, competition in the Indian banking sector also intensified. 
Another major achievement of this phase was the sharp increase in credit to agriculture from 2003-
04 onwards; credit to agriculture had decelerated in the 1990s. Regional rural banks were also 
strengthened by way of restructuring to improve the rural credit delivery system. In this phase, 
financial inclusion emerged as a major policy objective and a significant progress was made in a 
short span of two years. The problem of dual control in respect of urban co-operative banks, which 
had impeded the effective regulation by the Reserve Bank for a long time, was overcome by a 
mechanism of Task Force on Urban Co-operative Banks (TAFCUB). So far 19 State Governments 
have signed MOU with the Reserve Bank constituting the TAFCUBs. The use of technology has 
improved significantly in the current phase.   
 
Managing Resource Mobilisation 
 The deposit growth of SCBs in the post-nationalisation period could be analysed broadly in 
four phases.  In the first phase (1969-84) beginning immediately after nationalisation of banks in 
July 1969, deposit growth accelerated sharply as the rapid branch expansion that followed 
nationalisation enabled banks to tap savings from the rural areas. In the second phase (1985-95), 
deposit growth decelerated as banks faced increased competition from alternative savings 
instruments, especially capital market instruments (shares/debentures/units of mutual funds) and 
non-banking financial companies. This was the phase of disintermediation as savings instead of 
being deployed in bank deposits, were increasingly deployed in alternative financial instruments. 
Deposit growth decelerated further during the third phase (1995-2004) in the wake of competition 
from post office deposits and other small saving instruments, which carried significantly higher tax-
adjusted returns than bank deposits. Despite deceleration, bank deposits, however, maintained 
their share in the savings of the household sector. However, there was a significant change in both 
the ownership pattern and maturity pattern during this phase. In the most recent phase (2004-08), 
deposit growth accelerated significantly in response to vigorous resource mobilisation efforts by 
banks to meet the increased demand for credit. As a result, the share of bank deposits in the 
financial savings of the household sector increased sharply. 
 Banks have a major role to play in meeting the resource requirements of  India’s fast 
growing economy.  Although bank deposits have all along been the mainstay of the saving process 
in the Indian economy and banks have played an increasingly important role in stepping up the 
financial savings rate, physical savings, nevertheless, have tended to grow in tandem with the 
financial savings. A major challenge, thus, is to convert unproductive physical savings into financial 
savings. Also, in view of the shrinking share of household sector deposits in total deposits, banks 
need to explore ways of broadening the depositor base, especially in rural and semi-urban areas by 
offering customised products and features suitable to individual risk-return requirements. 
Furthermore, the changing demographics and employment patterns have also thrown opportunities 
for banks to reorient their role as financial intermediaries beyond the traditional confines of passive 
deposit mobilisation by providing new financial products demanded by the relatively younger age 
working population.  
 Managing Capital and Risk 
 
The importance of maintaining bank capital in line with the risks involved in the banking 
business has assumed greater significance in view of the need for maintaining the safety and 
soundness of the financial system.  The Basel I framework was adopted in over 100 countries.  
However, over the years, several deficiencies of Basel I surfaced partly due to its inherent features 
and partly due to rapid financial innovations.  The major limitation of Basel I was its 'one-size-fits-all' 
approach.  The inadequacies of Basel I also became evident following the recent financial turmoil 
as it failed to capture off-balance sheet exposures.  The Basel II framework, finalised in July 2006, 
attempts to align regulatory capital more closely with the inherent risks in banking by using 
enhanced risk measurement techniques and a more disciplined approach to risk management.  In 
addition, Basel II has in place a variety of safeguards, which also have the benefit of reinforcing 
supervisors' objective of strengthening risk management and market discipline. 
 
In keeping with the international best practices, India also decided to implement Basel II.  
Foreign banks operating in India and Indian banks having operational presence outside India have 
already adopted the standardised approach (SA) for credit risk and the basic indicator approach 
(BIA) for operational risk for computing their capital requirements with effect from March 31, 2008.  
All other commercial banks (excluding local area banks and regional rural banks) are expected to 
adopt Basel II not later than March 31, 2009.  The parallel runs for these banks are in progress.  A 
significant improvement in risk management practices, asset-liability management and corporate 
governance in Indian banks under regulatory pressure to adopt Basel II framework has been 
observed. 
 
  As banks would have to maintain capital for operational risk, overall capital requirements are 
expected to go up, even if there is an expected decline in the capital required on account of credit 
risk.  Since most of the banks in India are at present operating at capital adequacy ratios higher 
than the prescribed level, meeting the Basel II requirements is not an issue in the immediate future.  
In the medium to long-term, however, banks would need to raise capital resources to keep pace 
with the expansion of their business.  An assessment made in the Report suggests that the total 
capital requirements in the five years 2007-08 to 2011-12 are projected to go up by about 
Rs.5,70,000 crore assuming that banks maintain CRAR at 12 per cent, while the total capital 
requirements by public sector banks are projected to go up by about Rs.3,70,000 crore.  As regards 
the various options available to banks, more than 85 per cent of capital requirements in the past 
were met by banks through internally generated resources.  Apart from internal resources, banks 
also have headroom available to raise Tier 1 capital under innovation perpetual debt instruments 
(IPDI) and perpetual non-cumulative preference shares (PNCPS).  In addition, some public sector 
banks have some headroom available to raise capital from the market and dilute the Government 
shareholding to 51 per cent. 
 
While the Basel II framework, by making the capital requirements risk sensitive, would 
enhance the stability of the financial system, its implementation also raises several 
issues/challenges.  India follows a three track approach with commercial banks, co-operative banks 
and regional rural banks having been placed at different levels of capital adequacy norms.  The 
varying degree of stringency in capital regulation for different categories of banks raises the 
possibility of regulatory arbitrage.  Non-Basel entities [RRBs and rural co-operative banks such as 
state co-operative banks (StCBs) and district central co-operative banks (DCCBs)], therefore, need 
to be subjected to Basel norms.  Subsequently, based on the experience of implementing Basel II 
framework in respect of commercial banks, a view could be taken on the application of Basel II 
norms for other banks.  The role of credit agencies is crucial under the standardised approach for 
measuring credit risk.  Banks would have to continuously and constantly upgrade their skills, technology and risk management practices in line with market developments.  Apart from the 
adequate skills developed by the banks and by the Reserve Bank, the increased cost of adopting 
advanced approaches along with other incumbent risks and uncertainties require adequate 
safeguards to be put in place before these approaches are adopted.  These, among others, could 
include prescribing the leverage ratio so that the capital held does not fall significantly.  The 
problems relating to pro-cyclical lending behaviour, which is inherent in Basel II framework, could 
be countered by banks by managing regulatory capital position in such a way that they remain 
adequately capitalised during economic downswings so that they are not required to raise capital.  
Supervisors could also prescribe additional capital under Pillar 2 during a phase of business cycle 
expansion.  The implementation of Basel II norms is likely to create tensions on home-host co-
ordination issues and it would be a challenge to mitigate such tensions. 
 
Lending and Investment Operations of Banks  
 Credit extended by scheduled commercial banks from the early 1990s witnessed three 
distinct phases. Bank credit growth was erratic in the first phase (from 1990-91 to 1995-96). In the 
second phase (from 1996-97 to 2001-02), credit growth decelerated sharply and remained range 
bound due to the industrial slowdown, high level of NPAs and introduction of prudential norms, 
which made banks risk averse.  The third phase (from 2002-03 to 2006-07) was generally marked 
by high credit growth attributable to several factors, including pick-up in economic growth, sharp 
improvement in asset quality, moderation in inflation and inflation expectations, decline in real 
interest rates, increase in the  income levels of households and increased competition with the entry 
of new private sector banks.  
 Credit growth by scheduled commercial banks to agriculture accelerated sharply from 
2003-04. As a result, the share of credit to the agricultural sector in total credit by scheduled 
commercial banks and credit intensity of the agricultural sector improved significantly. However, 
some disquieting features were also observed. First, the share of long-term loans in total credit to 
agriculture declined almost consistently between 1991 and 2006 – the share in 2006 was less than 
half of that in 1991. Second, the share of marginal farmers in direct finance to farmers in terms of 
amount disbursed and in total number of credit accounts held by them showed little improvement.  
 Although the share of credit to industry in total bank credit declined in the current decade, 
the credit intensity of industry increased sharply. A cross country survey suggests that the reliance 
of industry on the banking sector in India was far greater than that in many other countries. Credit 
growth to the SME sector, which slowed down significantly between 1996-97 and 2003-04, picked 
up sharply from 2004-05.  However, the share of the SME sector in the total non-food bank credit 
declined almost consistently from 15.1 per cent in 1990-91 to 6.5 per cent in 2006-07. This 
suggests that it is the large corporates that have increased their dependence on the banking sector. 
The share of retail credit comprising housing loans, credit to individuals, credit cards receivables 
and lending for consumer durables, in total bank credit increased sharply from 6.4 per cent in 1990 
to 25.4 per cent in 2007.  On the whole, agriculture, large corporates and retail sector benefitted 
from credit expansion of recent years, while credit growth to the SME sector remained tepid until 
recently.   
 Banks’ investment portfolio (other than that mandated by the minimum statutory 
requirement) was adjusted mainly in response to the requirement of the loan portfolio.   
  Notwithstanding some pick-up in credit growth to the agriculture and SME sectors in recent 
years, there is need for more concerted efforts to increase the flow of credit to these sectors given 
their significance to the economy.  Creating enabling conditions, i.e., providing irrigation facilities, 
rural roads and other infrastructure in rural areas, is necessary to augment the credit absorptive 
capacity. Devising products to suit the specific needs of the farmers is critical. There is also a need 
for comprehensive public policy on risk management in agriculture. Computerisation of land records 
can go a long way in smoothening the flow of credit to agriculture. Similarly the credit assessment 
capabilities of banks need improvement to ensure flow of credit to SMEs. There is need to increase 
the use of cluster based lending and credit scoring, which has proved quite effective in many 
countries as also in India. In view of the increased exposure of banks to infrastructure and retail 
credit segments, banks need to guard against exposures to attendant risks. The corporate sector 
needs to gradually reduce its dependence on the banking sector and move towards tapping the 
capital market so as to enable the banking sector to meet the growing requirements of agriculture, 
SMEs and other small and tiny enterprises, which are unable to tap funds from other sources.    
 
Financial Inclusion  
Following a multi-pronged approach, several policy initiatives have been undertaken to 
promote financial inclusion in India from time to time. The available information suggests that 
financial inclusion improved considerably from the late 1960s to the early 1990s as reflected in 
expansion of formal financial services. This trend continued in the 1990s. According to the 59th 
round of All India Debt and Investment Survey of the NSSO, the share of number of households 
accessing credit from non-institutional sources increased sharply in 2002 in comparison with 1991 
(the reference year of last survey). This increase was mainly due to increased indebtedness of 
households for consumption and similar other purposes for which finance could not be availed of 
easily from formal sources. As a result,  the share of household indebtedness to non-institutional 
sources in their total indebtedness increased between 1991 and 2002 even as institutional credit to 
households expanded broadly at the same rate as during 1981-91. There has been significant 
improvement in various indicators of financial inclusion based on basic statistical return (BSR) data 
since the early 2000s. The number of credit accounts with all organised financial institutions 
1
(commercial banks, regional rural banks, urban co-operative banks, PACS, MFIs and SHGs) per 
100 adults improved from 18 in 2002 to 25 in 2007. Apart from credit penetration, significant 
improvement is also observed in deposit penetration. The number of saving accounts in all formal 
institutions increased to 54 per 100 persons (82 per 100 adults) in 2007 from 51 per 100 persons 
(80 for adults) in 1993. Around 22 per cent people in the country, who are below the poverty line, 
have little or no capacity to save.  After excluding the people below poverty line, there are a little 
over 100 saving accounts per 100 adults.  The data also suggest a significant strengthening of the 
micro-finance movement.  Various data sets/sources suggest different extent of financial inclusion 
due to methodological/definitional differences. There is, therefore, need to exercise utmost caution 
while drawing any firm conclusion about the extent of financial inclusion/exclusion in India based on 
any single source. 
                                                 
1
 Primary agricultural credit societies (PACS), micro-finance institutions (MFIs) and Self-Help Groups (SHGs) While there has been a significant improvement in financial inclusion in recent years, moving 
ahead several challenges remain to be addressed. A proper assessment of the problem of financial 
exclusion is necessary. There is, therefore, a need to conduct specific survey for gathering 
information relating to financial inclusion/exclusion. There is need to reduce the transaction cost for 
which technology can be very helpful. RRBs and co-operative banks, are expected to play a greater 
role in financial inclusion in future. There would be need to design appropriate products tailor made 
to suit the requirements of the people with low income supported by financial literacy and credit 
counselling.  There is also a need to improve the absorptive capacity of financial services by 
providing the basic infrastructure. Investment in human development such as health, water 
sanitation, and education, in particular, would be very  helpful.  
 
Competition and Consolidation   
 There has been a significant increase in the number of bank amalgamations in India in the 
post-reform period. While amalgamations of banks in the pre-1999 period were primarily triggered 
by the weak financials of the bank being merged, in the post-1999 period, mergers occurred 
between healthy banks, driven by the business strategy and commercial considerations.  
Significantly, despite increase in the number of bank mergers and acquisitions, the Indian banking 
system has become less concentrated during the post-reform period. In fact, the degree of 
concentration in the Indian banking system, based on the concentration ratio and Hirschman-
Herfindhal Index, was one of the lowest among the select countries studied for the year 2006. The 
level of competition declined somewhat in the initial years of reforms, but improved significantly 
thereafter. Based on the empirical evidence, the Indian banking industry could be characterised as 
a monopolistic competitive structure, as is the case with most other advanced countries and EMEs. 
The empirical analysis also suggests that mergers and amalgamation had a positive impact on 
efficiency both in terms of increase in return on assets and reduction in cost, when the transferees 
were public sector banks.  A number of critical issues have emerged in the process of bank 
consolidation in India, viz., the nature and extent of further consolidation; continued government 
ownership of public sector banks; further opening of the banking sector to foreign banks; and 
combining of banking and commerce. The consolidation process in the banking sector could 
accelerate in future in view of several developments such as the planned review of the roadmap of 
foreign banks and implementation of Basel II.  In the medium to long-term, the ownership pattern of 
public sector banks may also change. While some consolidation of the banking sector perhaps may 
be necessary, it would be appropriate to have in place a policy to ensure that the competition is not 
undermined any time in the future.  
 The ownership of public sector banks is not an issue from the efficiency viewpoint as 
public sector banks in India now are as efficient as new private and foreign banks, as revealed by 
the various measures. However, the operating environment for banks has been changing rapidly 
and banks in the changed operating environment need flexibility to respond to the evolving 
situation. Another issue that needs to be considered is the funding of capital requirements of public 
sector banks given the present floor of minimum 51 per cent on Government equity in public sector 
banks.  In the medium term, this can become an issue hampering the growth of public sector banks 
if Government is not able to provide adequate capital for their expansion.  The roadmap of foreign banks is due for review in 2009. This would involve several issues. 
The increased presence of foreign banks, by intensifying competition, may accelerate the 
consolidation process that is underway. However, at the same time, this may also raise the risk of 
concentration if mergers/amalgamations involve large banks. The experience of some other 
countries also suggests that the emergence of large banks due to consolidation has resulted in 
reduced lending to small enterprises significantly. All these issues would need to be carefully 
weighed at the time of review. The policy relating to ownership of banks by commercial interests 
may have to take full account of international practices, given the issues relating to potential conflict 
of interests, increased potential of contagion effects and increased concentration. 
 
 
Efficiency, Productivity and Soundness of the Banking Sector in India  
 The efficiency and productivity of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) in India was 
analysed empirically, using both the accounting and economic measures. The accounting 
measures (ratios, etc. based on balance sheet data) reveal that there has been an all-round 
improvement in the productivity/ efficiency of the SCBs in the post-reform period. The performance 
of banks, especially nationalised banks, worsened in the initial years of reforms as they took time to 
adjust to the new environment. However, a distinct improvement was discernable, especially 
beginning 2001-02. The efficiency/productivity parameters have now moved closer to the global 
levels. The most significant improvement has occurred in the performance of public sector banks 
and has converged with those of the foreign banks and new private sector banks. Intermediation 
cost as also the net interest margin declined across the bank groups. Despite this, however, 
profitability of the banking sector improved.  Business per employee and per branch also increased 
significantly across the bank groups. The improvement of various accounting measures, however, 
varied across the bank groups. In terms of cost ratios (operating cost to income) foreign banks, and 
with regard to labour productivity, foreign and new private banks were ahead of their peer groups. 
In terms of net interest margins and intermediation cost, new private sector banks and public sector 
banks, respectively, were more efficient than the other bank groups. The cost of deposits of foreign 
banks was the lowest in the industry.  However, this was not passed on to the borrowers, leading to 
higher net interest spread.  The empirical exercise suggested that the operating cost was the main 
factor affecting the net interest margin.  Non-interest income and the asset quality were the other 
determinants of net interest margin.  
 Efficiency and productivity measured by using non-parametric Data Envelopment Analysis 
(DEA) method corroborated the findings of the accounting measures or financial ratios. Efficiency 
improved across all bank groups and most of these efficiency gains emanated a few years after the 
reforms, i.e., from 1997-98 onwards.  The empirical analysis suggests that, there is no relationship 
between ownership and efficiency as most efficient banks relate to all the three segments, i.e., 
public, private and foreign. In fact, the 28 least efficient banks belonged to the private and foreign 
bank segments. On the other hand, there exists a positive and significant relationship between size 
and efficiency as also between diversification and efficiency. This implied that large and diversified 
banks were more efficient. Various factors contributed to improved efficiency and productivity.  
These included technological advances, reduction in statutory pre-emptions, reduction in non-
performing assets, shortening of maturity profile of deposits and lengthening of asset profile. The 
soundness of the Indian banking sector also improved both at the aggregate level and across bank 
groups as was reflected in the CRAR.     
  Notwithstanding significant improvement, there are several areas which need to be 
addressed. The intermediation cost in India, driven largely by the high operating costs, is still high 
by global standards. As the competition intensifies, net interest margins of banks are likely to come 
under pressure. Banks, therefore, need to focus on non-interest sources of income to sustain their 
profitability.  Although overall efficiency and productivity of public sector banks improved, one area 
of concern is the low business per employee, which is almost one half of that of new private sector 
banks. Public sector banks, therefore, have to strive further to improve labour productivity and bring 
it on par with the new private sector banks. Similarly, there is a need for increased absorption of 
enhanced technological capability (innovation) by several banks to further augment productivity of 
the banking sector through changes in processes and improvement in human resource skills.  
 
Regulatory and Supervisory Challenges in Banking  
 As the financial landscape in the last few years has changed significantly, there has been 
rethinking on several aspects of regulatory and supervisory practices/ framework/structure among 
the regulators and supervisors all over the world. In some countries such as UK, supervision has 
been hived off from the central bank to avoid perceived conflict of interest with monetary policy. In 
response to blurring of distinctions among providers of financial services and emergence of 
financial conglomerates, a single regulator approach has been adopted in some countries. Australia 
has adopted objective-based regulation. Increased emphasis is being placed on market discipline to 
economise on scarce supervisory resources. Greater attention is also being paid to disclosures, to 
allow markets and counterparties to better control excessive risk-taking by acting as disciplinary 
agents. The fast evolving financial sector and the ever expanding rule books of the regulatory 
bodies have made some countries such as UK to adopt principles-based supervision.  
The recent events in global financial markets in the aftermath of US subprime crisis have 
evoked rethinking on several regulatory and supervisory aspects of the banking industry, viz., how 
to cope with liquidity stresses under unusual circumstances;  whether ‘pro-cyclicality’ of capital 
requirements is one of the factors with inherent tendency that escalate the impact of booms and 
busts. Regulation of complex products and monitoring of derivatives is becoming an important 
issue. Further, a question has been raised whether institutions should be allowed to become so big 
and so complex that their problems can have system-wide repercussions. As a fallout of these 
developments, the role of central bank as a lender of last resort has come into focus and the need 
for central banks to be in close touch with both financial markets, and banks and other financial 
institutions has received enhanced attention.  
 The Reserve Bank, like other bank supervisors, has been proactively responding to the 
various changes in the financial system by bringing about necessary changes in the regulatory and 
supervisory framework. There has been a shift in the regulatory focus from micro regulation to 
macro management based on prudential elements, with a view to strengthening the banking sector 
and providing them with greater operational flexibility. Mechanisms have also been put in place to 
meet challenges arising out of globalisation and liberalisation, financial innovations and 
technological advancements and a growing financial conglomeration. A major challenge in the 
years ahead would be to ensure that financial conglomerates are regulated adequately.  The 
existing monitoring mechanism of financial conglomerates has some limitations, although an 
attempt is being made to take a group-wide perspective through inter-regulatory discussions and                     
co-operation. The growing use of e-finance products poses certain risks for banks, which would 
require appropriate safeguards.  Overall Assessment 
 The Report has attempted an in-depth analysis of various aspects of the banking sector in 
India against the backdrop of the evolution of the Indian banking sector beginning the 18th century 
with a focus on the post-independence period. The analysis suggests that the Indian banking sector 
has witnessed several structural changes from time to time. India now has a well-developed 
banking infrastructure, conducive regulatory environment and sound supervisory system. Banks 
have become efficient and sound and compare well with banks around the world. Banks in India 
have benefitted from the robust growth in the last few years, which enabled them to produce strong 
financial performance. Banks responded to the increased competition by diversifying and expanding 
through inorganic (acquisitions) and organic growth of existing businesses.  While some of the 
changes were triggered by endogenous factors, some others were on account of exogenous or part 
of global developments. While banks have been able to cope with the changed environment, the 
fast evolving financial landscape would continue to pose several challenges in future.  
 The end result of the rapidly changing financial landscape would be increased competition, 
both within the banking industry and with non-banks putting pressure on margins which may 
impinge on profitability of banks. Banks, therefore, need to restructure on the cost side.  High 
operating cost and diversification of activities would be some of the aspects, which banks need to 
focus on in the years ahead to remain competitive and profitable. The increase in the technological 
intensity is crucial in order to reduce the operating cost and achieve higher productivity. Though 
Indian banks have done exceedingly well in terms of containment of non-performing loans (NPLs), 
maintaining asset quality would continue to pose a constant challenge for banks. 
  The banking system’s focus should continue to be on strengthening the safety and 
soundness of the banking sector so that benefits of increased competition and greater efficiency 
can be fully realised. It is the banks themselves, rather than the regulators or supervisors that are 
mainly responsible for the performance as well as their financial health. In view of growing 
complexity, risk measurement and risk management at the institutional level and governance 
practices in banks need to be on the top of the agenda. The major challenge would be to exploit the 
opportunities that would emerge, while managing the risks.    
 An important lesson emerging from the recent financial market developments is that the 
focus should not be on how the turmoil should be managed, but on what policies could be put in 
place to strengthen the financial system on a longer-term basis regardless of specific sources of 
disturbances. These issues point towards the challenges that lie ahead to preserve the safety and 
soundness of the financial system. 
 
DISCLAIMER 
 
"The findings, views, and conclusions expressed in this Report are entirely those of the contributing 
staff of the Department of Economic Analysis and Policy (DEAP) and should not necessarily be 
interpreted as the official views of the Reserve Bank of India." 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
Press Release : 2008-2009/282 