` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
March 31, 1998 
 
Dr. Rangarajan releases  RBI History (1951-1967) 
His Excellency Dr. C.Rangarajan, Governor of Andhra Pradesh, today released the 
history of the Reserve Bank of India, entitled "The Reserve Bank of India, 1951-1967". 
The history was released in a function held at the Reserve Bank's Central Office in 
Mumbai. Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, presided over the function.  
Speaking on the occasion, Dr. Rangarajan pointed out that the history of the Reserve 
Bank of India has contemporary relevance in that events have a way of repeating 
themselves and the same concerns continue to recur. Elaborating, he said that even 
during the period 1951-67, as the volume spells out in detail, the monetary authorities 
were concerned with price stability, excessive reliance of the government on the 
recourse to the Reserve Bank and periodic balance of payment crises and their impact 
on the domestic economy and the financial system. There are, therefore, lessons to be 
learnt from their experience, he noted. Dr. Rangarajan also pointed out that 1951 to 
1967 was part of the developmental phase of the Reserve Bank and high lighted some 
of the other significant developments of that time, viz., conversion of the Imperial Bank of 
India into the State Bank of India, extension of rural credit, creating a strong banking 
supervisory system and setting up of new institutions for promoting industrial finance.  
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India in his presidential remarks stated that 
the history of the Reserve Bank of India highlights the enormous difficulties through 
which the Indian economy and the the Reserve Bank went through during the period 
under reference. He stated that the contribution of decision makers to the development 
of the economy and the Reserve Bank must be appreciated in this context. Dr. Jalan 
also noted that while there may have been different views on certain issues, as the 
correspondence reproduced in the history of the Reserve Bank highlights, even during 
1951-67 the authorities had healthy regard for each other's spheres and competence 
which translated into decision making.  
Written by Dr. G. Balachandran of the Delhi School of Eco nomics with the guidance of a 
Committee of Directions of the Reserve Bank under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. 
Rangarajan, `The Reserve Bank of India 1951-1967' is the second volume of the history 
of the Reserve Bank of India. The first volume, published in 1970 covered the period 
1935-1951. The present volume covers the larger part of the first two decades after 
independence, when pioneering steps were taken to strengthen, develop and diversify 
the country's economic and financial structure. The focus of this book is on the Reserve 
Bank and public policy. The book details the Reserve Bank's role in mobilising resources 
for the central and state governments, regulating and strengthening the banking system 
and establishing an institutional infrastructure for agricultural and long-term industrial credit in India. It also covers developments in India's external sector, including the 
country's efforts to raise long-term foreign assistance for development and the rupee 
devaluation of 1966. The main narra tion concludes with an elaborate survey of evolving 
relations between the central bank and the central and the state govern ments in India 
during these two decades. The book closes at 1967 - a significant year in terms of the 
shifts in the policy stance made after this with regard to economic and banking policies.  
The book, priced at Rs.1195, is available at all leading book stores in India.  
Dr. Bimal Jalan releases "Indian Economy - Essays on Money and Finance"  
Later, Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India released a book entitled "Indian 
Economy - Essays on Money and Finance".  
 
Releasing the book, Dr. Jalan said that the book provides great intellectual excitement 
and would become an important text book for post graduate students of Money and 
Finance. He pointed out that it is very rare to find that a person of such eminence as Dr. 
Rangarajan who is not only a renowned economist but has also worked in public life 
shares his thoughts and experiences. He complimented Dr. Rangarajan for producing a 
book that is contemporary and also of high quality and academic depth.  
 
Dr. Rangarajan stressed that the book is not a history of a particular period as it does not 
talk about how decisions were taken at that time; but only compilation of his lectures 
deliv ered during that time. The lectures, he stated, give a flavour of major events that 
surfaced during that period and the policy makers' response to criticism.  
 
The book "Indian Economy - Essays on Money and Finance" is a collection of lectures 
delivered by Dr. C. Rangarajan at various national and international for a during 1992-
1997. A great deal has changed in the Indian economy since the crisis year 1990-91. 
This change has been brought about by far-reaching policy reforms that were initiated in 
the economy in the wake of the economic crises. The lectures in the present book are 
arranged thematical ly and sequentially to trace the route travelled by India with respect 
to these economic reforms. The lectures in the book deal with some selected policy 
issues in the Indian economy in the context of the ongoing macro-economic reform 
programme. The policy issues covered in the book through various lectures are : 
monetary policy, financial sector policy, banking technology and rural credit, external 
policy and the state and the market.  
 
This book, priced at Rs.375, is available from M/s UBS Publishers' and Distributors Ltd., 
5 Ansari Road, New Delhi 110002 (e-mail: ubspd.del@smy.sprintrpg.ems.vsnl.net.in)  
 
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/910  
 