   ?  
 œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
June 12, 2008 
 
Mobile Payments in India - Operative Guidelines for Banks 
 
With the rapid growth in the number of mobile phone subscribers in India 
banks have been exploring the feasibility of using mobile phones as an alternative 
channel of delivery of banking services. A few banks have started offering 
information based services like balance enquiry, stop payment instruction of 
cheques, record of last five transactions, location of nearest ATM/branch etc. 
Acceptance of transfer of funds instruction for credit to beneficiaries of same/or 
another bank in favour of pre-registered beneficiaries have also commenced in a 
few banks. Considering that the technology is relatively new and due care needs 
to be taken on security of financial transactions, the Reserve Bank of India has felt 
the need for a set of operating guidelines that can be adopted by banks.   
 
Accordingly the Reserve Bank has prepared a 'Draft Operating Guidelines 
for Mobile Payments in India', in consultation with banks and a few industry 
bodies. The draft guidelines are placed on the website for public comments. 
Comments can be sent latest by June 30, 2008 to the Chief General Manager, 
Reserve Bank of India, Department of Payment and Settlement Systems, Central 
Office, 14th floor, Central Office Building, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 or faxed 
to 022-22659566. Comments can also be e-mailed. 
 
 
  Alpana Killawala 
                    Chief General Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1589 
  
Mobile Payment in India  -  Operative Guidelines for Banks 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 With the rapid growth in the number of  mobile phone subscribers in India (about  
261 million as at the end of March 2008 and growing at about 8 million a month), 
banks have been exploring the feasibility of using mobile phones as an 
alternative channel of delivery of banking services.  A few banks have started 
offering information based services like balance enquiry, stop payment 
instruction of cheques, record of last five transactions, location of nearest 
ATM/branch etc. Acceptance of transfer of funds instruction for credit to 
beneficiaries of same/or another bank in favor of pre-registered beneficiaries 
have also commenced in a few banks. Considering that the technology is 
relatively new and due care needs to be taken on security of financial 
transactions, there has been an urgent need for a set of operating guidelines that 
can be adopted by banks.   
 
1.2 For the purpose of these Guidelines, “mobile payments”   is defined as 
information exchange between a bank and its customers for financial 
transactions through the use of mobile phones. Mobile payment involves 
debit/credit to a customer’s account’s on the basis of funds transfer instruction 
received over the mobile phones.  
 
1.3 Providing the framework for enabling mobile payments services to banking 
customers would generally involve the collaboration of banks, mobile payments 
service providers and mobile network operators (MNOs). The service can also be 
provided as a proximity payment system, where the transactions are independent 
of the MNOs. In mobile payment systems, the banks provide the basic service 
framework, ensure compliance to KYC/AML norms, creates a risk management 
and mitigation framework, and ensures settlement of funds. The mobile 
payments service providers are intermediaries for providing the technology 
framework for the implementation of the mobile payments services. The mobile 
network operators provide the telecom infrastructure and connectivity to the 
customers. Their role is limited to providing the SMS/WAP/GPRS/USSD/NFC 
GSM or CDMA voice and data services connectivity and in hosting the certain 
technology solutions like USSD. In a Non-MNO based systems, proximity or 
contactless channels like IRDA, RFID, Optical, NFC, etc. are used for 
communication between POS and the mobile phone of the customer.   
1.4 As a first step towards building a mobile payment framework in India, these 
guidelines are meant only for banking customers – within the same bank and 
across the banks. It would be the responsibility of the banks offering mobile 
payment service to ensure compliance to these guidelines.  
 
1.5 A brief description of the regulatory framework for mobile payments in a few 
countries is given at Annex – I. 
 
2. Regulatory & Supervisory Issues 
 
2.1 Only such banks which are licensed and supervised in India and have a physical 
presence in India will be permitted to offer mobile payment services to residents 
of India.  
 
2.2 The services should be restricted to only to bank accounts/ credit card accounts   
in India which are KYC/AML compliant.  
 
2.3 Only Indian Rupee based services should be provided.  
 
2.4 Banks may use the services of Business Correspondents for extending this 
facility, to their customers. The guidelines with regard to use of business 
correspondent would be as per the RBI circular on Business correspondents 
issued from time to time.  
 
2.5 The guidelines issued by RBI on ‘Risks and Controls in Computers and 
Telecommunications’ vide circular DBS.CO.ITC.BC. 10/ 31.09.001/ 97-98 dated 
4th February 1998 will equally apply to Mobile payments, since Mobile devices 
used for this purpose have embedded computing and communication 
capabilities.  
 
2.6 The RBI guidelines on “Know Your Customer (KYC)” and “Anti Money 
Laundering (AML)” as prescribed by RBI from time to time would be would be 
applicable to customers opting for mobile based banking service.  
 
 
3. Registration of customers for mobile service 
 
3.1 Banks should offer mobile based banking service only to their own customers.   
3.2 Banks should have a system of registration before commencing mobile based 
payment service to a customer.  
 
3.3 There can be two levels of mobile based banking service - the first or basic level 
in the nature of information like balance enquiry, SMS alert for credit or debit, 
status of last five transactions, and many other information providing services 
and the second or standard level in the nature of financial transactions such as 
payments, transfers and stop payments. The risk associated with the basic level 
of information services is much less compared to the standard level of actual 
payment services. Prior registration of the customers would be necessary 
irrespective of the type of service requested. For the standard level service one 
time registration should be done through a signed document. 
 
4 Technology and Security Standards 
 
4.1  The technology used for mobile payments must be secure and should ensure 
confidentiality, integrity, authenticity and non-repudiability.  An illustrative, but not 
exhaustive framework is given at Annex-II. 
 
4.2 The Information Security Policy of the banks may be suitably updated and 
enforced to take care of the security controls required specially for mobile phone 
based delivery channel.  
 
5. Inter-operability 
 
5.1 When a bank offers mobile payments service, it may be ensured that customers 
having mobile phones of any network operator should be in a position to request 
for service. Restriction, if any, to the customers of particular mobile operator(s) 
may be only during the pilot phase. 
  
5.2 To ensure inter-operability between banks and between their mobile payments 
service providers, it is recommended that banks may adopt the message formats 
being developed by Mobile Payments Forum of India (MPFI). Message formats 
such as ISO 8583 , which is already being used by banks for switching of ATM 
transactions , may be suitably adapted for communication between switches 
where the source and destination are credit card/ debit cards/pre-paid cards.  
5.3 The long term goal of mobile payment framework in India would be to enable 
funds transfer from account in one bank to any other account in the same or any 
other bank on a real time basis irrespective of mobile network a customer has 
subscribed to. This would require inter-operability between mobile payments 
service providers and banks and development of a host of message formats. 
Banks may keep this objective while developing solution or entering into 
arrangements with mobile payments solution providers.  
  
6. Clearing and Settlement for inter-bank funds transfer transactions 
 
6.1 For inter-bank funds transfer transactions, banks can either have bilateral or 
multilateral arrangements.   
 
6.2 To meet the long term objective of a nation-wide mobile payment framework in 
India as indicated at para 5.3 above, a robust clearing and settlement 
infrastructure operating on a 24x7 basis would be necessary. Pending creation of 
such an infrastructure on a national basis, banks may enter in to multilateral 
arrangement and create Mobile Switches / Inter-bank Payment Gateways with 
expressed permission from RBI.  
 
7.         Customer Complaints and Grievance Redressal Mechanism  
 
7.1 The customer /consumer protection issues assume a special significance in view 
of the fact that the delivery of banking services through mobile phones is 
relatively new. Some of the key issues in this regard and the legal aspects 
pertaining to them are given at Annex-III. 
 
8. Need for Board level approval  
 
8.1 Banks should get the Mobile payments scheme approved by their respective 
boards / Local board (for foreign banks) before offering it to their customers. The 
Board  approval must document the extent of Operational and Fraud risk 
assumed by the bank and the bank’s processes and policies designed to mitigate 
such risk. 
 
8.2 banks who have already started offering mobile payment service may review the 
position and comply to these guidelines within a period of three months from 
issuance of these guidelines. 
 
  
List of Abbreviations 
 
 
AML   Anti Money Laundering 
CDMA   Code Division Multiple Access 
GPRS   General Packet Radio Service 
GSM   Global System for Mobile 
IDS   Intruder Detection System 
IRDA   Infrared Data Association 
ISO   International Standards  Organization ( Some times also 
                    written as International Organization for Standardization) 
IVR   Integrated Voice Response 
KYC   Know Your Customer 
MNO   Mobile Network Operator   
mPIN   Mobile Personal Identification Number 
MPFI   Mobile Payment Forum of India 
NFC   Near Field communication. 
OTP   One Time Password 
PCI-DSS  Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard 
PIN   Personal Identification Number 
RFID   Radio Frequency Identification 
SIM   Subscriber Identity Module 
SMS   Short Messaging Service 
USSD   Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
WAP   Wireless Application Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annex-I 
 
 
International Experience 
 
There is very little material available on the regulatory frame work for mobile payments 
by central banks. Although there are a number of research articles available, they refer 
to the practices available rather than regulatory guidelines. Efforts to collect specific 
regulatory guidelines, from a few countries where person to person remittance through 
mobile channel has been implemented, have not been a success. Mobile payment 
framework in most countries is covered under the General Electronic Banking 
Guidelines. However, on the website of Consultative Group for Assisting the 
Poor(CGAP), there are several discussion papers on mobile payments. Examples of 
Kenya, Philippines, South Africa and Tanzania have been described in great detail.  In 
these countries, cash-in and cash-out for the purpose of remittance is permitted to be 
done by the distributors of mobile companies. State Bank of Pakistan has also placed a 
'Draft policy paper on Regulatory Framework for Mobile Payments in Pakistan' on their 
website for public comments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annex- II 
 
Technology and Security Standards 
 
The security controls/guidelines mentioned in this document are not exhaustive. The 
guidelines should be applied in a way that is appropriate to the risk associated with 
services provided by the bank through the mobile platform, the devices used, the 
delivery channels used (SMS, USSD, WAP, WEB, SIM tool kit based, Smart phone 
application based, IVR, IRDA, RFID, NFC, voice, etc) and the system which processes 
the mobile transactions and enables the interaction between the customers, merchants, 
banks and other participants.  
 
2. The mobile payments could get offered through various mobile network operator 
based channels (SMS, USSD, WAP, WEB, SIM tool kit, Smart phone application based, 
IVR, voice, etc) and non MNO based proximity or contactless channels (IRDA, RFID, 
Optical, NFC, etc) and these various mobile channels offer various degrees of security 
and interaction capability. While the objective of the RBI is to have a fully functional 
digital certificate based inquiry/transaction capabilities to ensure the authenticity and 
non-repudiability, given the complexities involved in getting this through all the channels 
and given the need for enabling mobile payments to facilitate financial inclusion 
objectives, it is suggested that the banks evaluate each of these channels in terms of 
security and risks involved and offer appropriate services and transactions. Banks are 
also advised to provide appropriate risk mitigation measures like transaction limit (per 
transaction, daily, weekly, monthly), transaction velocity limit, fraud checks, AML checks 
etc. per channel  depending on the nature of the security features, risk perception by the 
bank offering the services and interaction capabilities. 
 
3. It is suggested that the banks issue a new mobile pin (mPIN). To facilitate the mobile 
payments mPIN may be issued and authenticated by the bank or by a mobile payment 
application service provider appointed by the bank. Banks and the various service 
providers involved in the m-banking should comply with the following security principles 
and practices with respect to mPIN : 
 
a) Implement a minimum of 4 digit customer mPIN (6 digit mPIN may be 
the desirable goal)  
 
b) Protect the mPIN using end to end encryption 
 
c) Do   not allow the mPIN to be in clear text anywhere in the network or 
the system 
 
d) Authenticate the mPIN in tamper-resistant hardware such as HSM (hardware security modules)  
 
e) Store the PIN in a secure environment 
 
f) In case of offline authentication, the banks should ensure that a proper 
process is put in place to positively identify the customer the first time 
when the service is being enabled. An offline PIN may be used as the 
authentication parameter with security levels being as strong as in the 
case of online authentication. The bank may choose to issue its own 
offline PIN or adopt a customer-defined PIN. 
 
g) A second factor of authentication may be built-in for additional security 
and as such the second factor can be of the choosing of the bank 
 
4. All transactions that affect an account (those that result in to an account being 
debited or credited, including scheduling of such activity, stop payments, etc) should be 
allowed only after authentication of the mobile number and the mPIN associated with it 
in case of MNO based payment service. In case of Non-MNO based mobile proximity 
payment, specific static or dynamic identifier should be used as second factor 
authentication along with mPIN.. Two factor authentication may be adopted even for 
transactions of  information nature such as balance enquiry, mini statements, registered 
payee details. ,  
 
5. Proper system of verification of the mobile phone number should be implemented, 
wherever possible. This is to guard against spoofing of the phone numbers as mobile 
phones would be used as the second factor authentication. It may also be suggested 
but not mandatory, that either card number or OTP (one time passwords) be used as 
the second factor authentication rather than the phone number. 
 
6. Proper level of encryption should be implemented for communicating from the mobile 
handset to the bank’s server or the server of the mobile payments service provider, if 
any. Proper security levels should be maintained for transmission of information 
between the bank and the mobile payments service provider. The following guidelines 
with respect to network and system security should be adhered to: 
 
a) Use strong encryption for protecting the sensitive and confidential 
information of bank and customers in transit 
 
b) Implement application level encryption over network and transport 
layer encryption wherever possible. 
 
c) Establish proper firewalls, intruder detection systems ( IDS), data 
file and system integrity checking, surveillance and incident response procedures and containment procedures. 
 
d) Conduct periodic risk management analysis, security vulnerability 
assessment of the application and network etc at least once in a 
year. 
 
e) Maintain proper and full documentation of security practices, 
guidelines, methods and procedures used in mobile payments and 
payment systems and keep them up to date based on the periodic 
risk management, analysis and vulnerability assessment carried 
out. 
 
f) Implement appropriate physical security measures to protect the 
system gateways, network equipments, servers, host computers, 
and other hardware/software used from unauthorized access and 
tampering. The Data Centre of the Bank and Service Providers 
should have proper wired and wireless data network protection 
mechanisms. 
 
7. The dependence of banks on mobile payments service providers may place 
knowledge of bank systems and customers in a public domain. Mobile payment system 
may also make the banks dependent on small firms ( i.e mobile payment service 
providers) with high employee turnover. It is therefore imperative that sensitive 
customer data, and security and integrity of transactions are protected. It is necessary  
that the mobile payments servers at the bank’s end or at the  mobile payments service 
provider’s end, if any, should be certified appropriately, say through a PCI DSS 
certification or in compliance with each participant banks security guidelines. In addition, 
banks should conduct regular information security audits on the mobile payments 
systems to ensure complete security. Further, if a mobile payments service provider 
aggregates and processes transaction, including verification of mPINs, additional 
security measures such as a Hardware Security Module (HSM) must be deployed over 
and above link encryption to ensure that mPIN data is protected adequately.  
 
8. It is recommended that for channels such as WAP and WEB which do not contain the 
phone number as identity, a separate login ID and password be provided as distinct 
from the internet banking either by bank or the payment service provider. It is 
recommended that Internet Banking login ids and passwords may not be allowed to be 
used through the mobile phones. Allowing Internet banking login id and password usage 
on the mobile phone may compromise their usage on the Internet banking channel. This 
restriction may be communicated to the customers while offering mobile payments 
service. However, Internet Banking login ids and passwords can allowed to be used 
through the mobile phones provided a) https connectivity through GPRS is used and b) 
end to end encryption of the password and customer sensitive information happens.   
9. Plain text SMS is the simplest form of communication through mobile phones, but is 
vulnerable to tampering. As long as there is a second level of check on the details of the 
transaction so as to guard against data tampering this mode of communication can be 
used for financial messages of micro payment transactions (say about rupees One 
thousand five hundred) and repetitive utility bill payment transactions (say not 
exceeding rupees two thousand five hundred).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annex-III 
Customer Protection Issues 
 
Considering the legal position prevalent, there is an obligation on the part of banks not 
only to establish the identity but also to make enquiries about integrity and reputation of 
the prospective customer. Therefore, even though request for opening a savings / 
current account can be accepted over Mobile Telecommunication, these should be 
opened only after proper introduction and physical verification of the identity of the 
customer using prevalent KYC norms.   
 
2. From a legal perspective, security procedure adopted by banks for authenticating 
users needs to be recognized by law as a substitute for signature. In India, the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, provides for a particular technology  as a means of 
authenticating electronic record. Any other method used by banks for authentication 
should be recognized as a source of legal risk. Customers must be made aware of the 
said legal risk prior to sign up. 
 
3. Under the present regime there is an obligation on banks to maintain secrecy and 
confidentiality of customers‘ accounts. In the mobile payments scenario, the risk of 
banks not meeting the above obligation is high on account of several factors. Despite all 
reasonable precautions, banks may be exposed to enhanced risk of liability to 
customers on account of breach of secrecy, denial of service etc., because of hacking/ 
other technological failures. The banks should, therefore, institute adequate risk control 
measures to manage such risks.  
 
4. As in an Internet banking scenario, in the mobile payments scenario too, there is very 
limited or no stop-payment privileges for mobile payments transactions since it becomes 
impossible for the banks to stop payment in spite of receipt of stop payment instruction 
as the transactions are completely instantaneous and are incapable of being reversed.  
Hence, banks offering mobile payments should clearly notify the customers the 
timeframe and the circumstances in which any stop-payment instructions could be 
accepted. 
 
5. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 defines the rights of consumers in India and is 
applicable to banking services as well. Currently, the rights and liabilities of customers 
availing of mobile payments services are being determined by bilateral agreements 
between the banks and customers. Considering the banking practice and rights enjoyed 
by customers in traditional banking, banks’ liability to the customers on account of 
unauthorized transfer through hacking, denial of service on account of technological 
failure etc. needs to be assessed and banks providing Mobile payments should consider 
insuring themselves against such risks, as is the case with Internet Banking.  
6. Bilateral contracts between the payee and payee’s bank, the participating banks and 
service provider and the banks themselves will form the legal basis for mobile 
transactions. The rights and obligations of each party must be clearly defined and 
should be valid in a court of law. It is likely that there will be two sets of contracts; one 
would be a commercial contract between service providers and the second, a contract 
between the customer and the bank, to provide a particular service/ s. At all time, legal 
obligations of each party must be made clear through these contracts. 
 
7. Banks must make mandatory disclosures of risks, responsibilities and liabilities of the 
customers in doing business through Mobile phone, through a disclosure template on 
their websites and/or through printed material. 
 
8. The existing mechanism for handling customer complaints / grievances may be used 
for mobile payment transactions as well. However, the technology is relatively new, 
banks offering mobile payment service should set up a help desk and make the details 
of the help desk and escalation procedure for lodging the complaints, if any public on 
their websites. Such details should also be made available to the customer at the time 
of sign up. 
 
9. In cases where the customer files a complaint with the bank disputing a 
transaction, it would be the responsibility of the service providing bank, to address 
the customer grievance. Banks may formulate chargeback procedures for 
addressing such customer grievances.  
 
10. Banks may also consider covering the risks arising out of fraudulent/disputed 
transactions through appropriate insurance schemes. 
 
11. The jurisdiction of legal settlement would be within India. 
 
 
 
 
 