  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
August 29, 2008 
RBI releases Annual Report for 2007- 08 
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Annual Report for 2007-2008. 
 
Overall Performance 
The Indian economy continued to perform well during 2007-08, although the growth moderated 
marginally. This was the third year in succession when the Indian economy achieved a growth rate of 9 per 
cent and above. This was also the highest average growth rate achieved during any three year period in 
the history of independent India. During each of the last three years, the growth rate of agriculture was well 
above the trend growth rate with foodgrains production touching a new high in each of the last two years.  
Industry also registered robust growth with the growth rate in the previous year being in double digits. 
Services exhibited double digit growth in all the three years. Although the Indian economy has been 
generally performing well in the post-reform period, the performance during the last three years was indeed 
noteworthy and it was second only to China among the major countries,  
The improved performance in the last three years was the result of the well thought out and 
calibrated reforms pursued in the various sectors during the last one decade and a half. The high growth 
rate was underpinned by a distinct improvement in the saving and investment rates mainly on account of a 
turnaround in the public sector saving rate and improvement in the corporate sector saving rates along with 
the sustained high saving rate of households. Under the rule-based fiscal consolidation programme, public 
sector savings witnessed a turnaround underpinned by a steady increase in the tax-GDP ratio and steady 
improvement in savings of non-departmental undertakings. This enabled a narrowing of public sector 
saving-investment gaps in recent years, thereby releasing greater resources for the private sector. A 
significant financial restructuring by the corporate sector and consequent reduction in the overall debt-
equity ratio has had a significant impact on the profitability of the corporate sector and its savings. 
Household savings have been high traditionally in India and their contribution to overall savings has 
remained steady in recent years. Improved savings and generally comfortable financing conditions from the 
domestic and international capital markets drove the private investment rate above 10 per cent of GDP 
from 2004-05. Another major driver of the growth process has been improved levels of productivity as 
reflected in the stable and low incremental capital-output ratio. While studies show that both industry and 
services have recorded productivity gains, such gains have been more pronounced in respect of the 
services sector. Productivity gains in industry and services emanated from increased use of technology, 
reorientation of processes, increased capacity utilisation and continued restructuring of the corporate 
sector.   
The slight moderation in growth in 2007-08 in comparison with 2006-07 was mainly due to some 
adverse developments in the second half of the year. Growth decelerated sharply in the advanced 
industrial economies in the last quarter of 2007 mainly on account of turbulence in the international 
financial markets. Domestic inflation, which was well below the projections till December 2007, started 
hardening from January 2008, both on account of supply side pressures such as the one-off increase in 
domestic petrol and diesel prices, continuous hardening of prices of petroleum products that were not 
administered, rise in prices of wheat and oilseeds and adjustment in steel prices, and increased demand 
side pressures.  Concerns over slowdown in growth in relation to earlier expectations encouraged central 
banks in many advanced countries to reduce their policy rates. The resultant rise in liquidity led to a search 
of higher yields. India with strong macroeconomic fundamentals attracted large capital flows during 2007-
08, driven by external commercial borrowings, portfolio flows and foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows. 
Capital flows significantly higher than the current account deficit (which widened on account of strong 
import demand and rise in crude oil prices) and hardening of inflation necessitated pre-emptive monetary 
policy actions to dampen excessive demand pressures, while providing a conducive environment for 
continuation of the growth momentum.  The short-term growth prospects are now faced with several downside risks, both global and 
domestic. Global economic conditions have worsened with the growth in major advanced economies 
decelerating and inflation hardening.  In India, headline industrial growth after a sustained expansion that 
began in 2003-04 moderated from September 2007.  Growth in the services sector has also showed some 
signs of moderation due mainly to somewhat lower growth in the financial and construction sub-sectors.  
Inflation has hardened further even though the pass-through of the rise in international crude oil prices 
remains incomplete. Finances of the Government are under some stress on account of several factors 
such as increased pressures from oil, fertilisers and food subsidies, the farm loan waiver scheme and the 
hike in wages following the implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission recommendations.  
Notwithstanding some downside risks to macroeconomic activity in the short run, the medium to 
long term prospects continue to remain robust. The structural factors underpinning the growth process 
continue to be as robust as before. The rise in saving and investment rates and gains in productivity 
experienced in recent years are likely to be sustained. Public finances, despite some underlying pressures, 
have remained broadly on the track so far as prescribed under the fiscal rules. The improvement in State 
finances, in particular, in recent years is encouraging. There has been a sharp improvement in the 
profitability, asset quality and soundness parameters of the banking sector. As a result, the banking sector 
has developed resilience and is better equipped to intermediate funds efficiently than before. The balance 
sheets of the corporate sector have also strengthened significantly over the years.  On the external sector 
front, although India's current account deficit has been widening, its robust macroeconomic fundamentals 
have ensured some capital inflows even during periods of heightened global uncertainty.  
Although the medium to long-term prospects remain robust, there is a need to persist with the 
reform efforts in all the sectors of the economy to realise the full potential of the economy.  
Assessment of 2007-08 
Real GDP growth was placed at 9.0 per cent during 2007-08, moderating from 9.6 per cent 
recorded during 2006-07 and 9.4 per cent during 2005-06. However, it was still significantly higher than the 
average of 7.8 per cent achieved during the Tenth Plan (2002-2007). Growth in agriculture and allied 
activities recovered from 3.8 per cent in 2006-07 to 4.5 per cent in 2007-08, which was higher than the 
average growth of 4.0 per cent targeted for the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012). The overall foodgrains 
production was also estimated to touch an all-time peak of 230.7 million tonnes, underpinned by above 
normal and well distributed South-West Monsoon. Record high levels were touched by all foodgrains, led 
by pulses, coarse cereals and rice. Among non-food crops, oilseeds and cotton touched their peak levels, 
with the former witnessing particularly a significant increase. The industrial upturn, which started in April 
2002 and peaked by the end of 2006-07, moderated during 2007-08. In terms of index of industrial 
production, industrial growth decelerated from 11.5 per cent in 2006-07 to 8.5 per cent in 2007-08. 
Manufacturing growth (9.0 per cent) was lower than in the preceding three years. The services sector 
continued to record double digit growth for the third successive year, notwithstanding some moderation (to 
10.7 per cent in 2007-08 from 11.2 per cent in 2006-07). 
 
Monetary Developments 
Growth in money supply (M ) decelerated marginally from 21.5 per cent during 2006-07 to 20.8 per 
3
cent during 2007-08. Of the major components, buoyancy in time deposits continued during 2007-08, albeit 
there was some moderation in the last quarter of the year. Time deposits continued to grow at a robust 
rate, albeit somewhat lower than the last year. Demand deposits grew at a higher rate than in the previous 
year, with much of the expansion taking place in January and February 2008, when the equity market 
turned volatile. On the sources side, growth of bank credit moderated marginally during 2007-08, after 
three consecutive years of strong expansion. Demand for bank credit was broad-based with agriculture, 
industry and retail sectors absorbing bulk of the incremental expansion in overall non-food credit during 
2007-08. Growth of credit to sectors such as commercial real estate remained high (y-o-y growth of 38 per 
cent at end-March 2008). Banks’ SLR investment, as a proportion of their net demand and time liabilities 
(NDTL), was 27.8 per cent at end-March 2008, almost the same level as at end-March 2007. Net foreign 
assets remained the key driver of reserve money.  Headline inflation, after easing up to an intra-year low of 3.1 per cent in mid-October 2007, 
increased subsequently to 7.7 per cent by end-March 2008, partly reflecting supply-side pressures on key 
agricultural commodities such as rice, wheat, oilseeds/edible oils, increase in iron and steel prices in line 
with international prices, partial pass-through of international crude oil prices to domestic prices and 
continued demand pressures. The increase in domestic primary food prices, however, was of a significantly 
lower order (6.5 per cent) compared with an increase of 45.3 per cent in international food prices, on a 
year-on-year basis in March 2008. Consumer price inflation, which had eased up to January 2008, 
increased subsequently mainly due to increase in food and services prices. Various measures of consumer 
price inflation at 6.0-7.9 per cent in March 2008 were placed lower as compared with 6.7-9.5 per cent a 
year earlier. In order to contain inflation and inflationary expectations, the Reserve Bank continued to take 
pre-emptive monetary actions in a calibrated manner in line with the evolving monetary and liquidity 
conditions. While leaving the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) rates unchanged during the year, the 
Reserve Bank increased the cash reserve ratio by a further 150 basis points during 2007-08. The 
Government also took various fiscal measures during 2007-08 in the form of reduction in customs duties 
and restrictions on exports of few essential commodities to augment domestic supply and check price 
spirals, especially in food items. 
 
Financial Markets 
Global financial markets witnessed turbulent conditions during the most part of 2007-08 as losses 
on US sub-prime mortgage loans escalated into widespread financial stress, raising fears about stability of 
banks and other financial institutions. The crisis in the sub-prime mortgage market gradually deepened and 
spilled over to markets for other assets. Financial markets in India remained, by and large, orderly during 
2007-08, barring the equity market, which witnessed occasional bouts of volatility during the second-half of 
August 2007, second-half of December 2007 and beginning the first week of January 2008 broadly in 
tandem with trends in international equity markets. The primary market segment of the capital market, 
which had witnessed increased activity till early January 2008, turned subdued thereafter due to volatility in 
the secondary market. Over the year, as a whole, however, the equity market registered further gains. Brief 
spells of volatility were observed in the money market on account of changes in capital flows and cash 
balances of the Central Government with the Reserve Bank. After the withdrawal of the ceiling on reverse 
repo acceptances under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) in August 2007, interest rates in overnight 
money markets moved broadly in the reverse repo and repo corridor for the most part of the year. 
Collateralised money market rates remained below the call rate during the year. In the foreign exchange 
market, the Indian rupee generally appreciated. Yields in the government securities market softened during 
the large part of the year.  
 
Balance of Payments 
India’s balance of payments remained comfortable during 2007-08.  Merchandise trade continued 
to exhibit robust growth during 2007-08. The growth in exports in recent years has been underpinned by 
structural factors like product diversification towards technology-intensive items as well as favourable terms 
of trade in respect of commodity exports amidst ongoing surge in their prices globally. India’s exports also 
witnessed geographical diversification, as a result of which the share of developing countries in India’s 
exports increased, while that of developed markets such as the European Union (EU) and the US declined. 
The growth of merchandise imports accelerated in the wake of an unprecedented rise in international crude 
oil prices and continued buoyancy in capital goods imports. Overall, higher import growth relative to exports 
in recent years has resulted in widening of the trade deficit, on a balance of payments basis.  However, net 
surplus under invisibles offset a large part of the trade deficit, thereby containing the current account deficit 
at 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2007-08 as compared with 1.1 per cent in 2006-07.  Net capital flows to India 
increased sharply to 9.2 per cent of GDP during 2007-08, which were 2.4 times higher than the level in 
2006-07. Large net capital flows, which were significantly higher than the current account deficit, led to an 
accretion of foreign exchange reserves, placing continued pressure on monetary management.  Outlook for 2008-09 
The global economy has continued to slow down during 2008 so far mainly due to slackness in 
growth in advanced economies such as the US, the UK and the Euro area. During 2008-09 (April-August), 
global financial markets witnessed generally uncertain conditions. Going forward, the overall balance of 
risks to the short-term global growth outlook remains tilted to the downside with growth in advanced 
economies expected to fall well below the potential. For monetary policy purposes, the Reserve Bank, in its 
Annual Policy Statement for 2008-09 (April 2008) had placed real GDP growth in the range of 8.0-8.5 per 
cent assuming that global financial and commodity markets and real economy would be broadly aligned 
with the central scenario; and domestically, normal monsoon conditions would prevail. The Reserve Bank 
in its First Quarter Review of the Annual Statement of Monetary Policy (July 2008) indicated that taking into 
account aggregate demand and supply prospects, for policy purposes, a projection of around 8.0 per cent 
for real GDP growth appeared a more realistic central scenario, barring domestic or external shocks. 
Expansion of money supply (M ), (y-o-y), as on August 1, 2008 (19.6 per cent) was lower than a 
3
year ago (21.8 per cent), but  higher than the indicative projection of 17.0 per cent set out in the  First 
Quarter Review of Annual Statement on Monetary Policy (July 2008). Growth of aggregate deposits 
decelerated due to deceleration in both demand and time deposits. Growth in bank credit, on the other 
hand, accelerated with growth in non-food credit of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs), y-o-y, placed at 
26.2 per cent on August 1, 2008 as compared with 23.5 per cent a year ago. Accordingly, the incremental 
credit-deposit ratio of SCBs rose to 86.0 per cent from 67.2 per cent a year ago. Investments in SLR 
securities by SCBs were at 27.0 per cent of their net demand and time liabilities on August 1, 2008 (27.8 
per cent at end-March 2008) as compared with 28.6 per cent a year ago. Growth of reserve money, y-o-y, 
as on August 15, 2008 at 31.1 per cent (24.3 per cent adjusted for the first round impact of increases in the 
CRR) was higher than 24.1 per cent (14.2 per cent adjusted for the first round effect of increases in CRR) a 
year ago.  
Headline inflation firmed up further to 12.6 per cent on August 9, 2008 from 7.7 per cent at end-
March 2008 (and 4.2 per cent a year ago), partly reflecting the impact of another round of upward revision 
in the prices of administered petroleum products such as petrol, diesel and LPG as well as increase in 
prices of freely-priced petroleum products. Apart from fuel prices, the intermittent but sharp increase in 
basic metals prices in line with international trends, along with iron ore prices, were the other major factors 
that have contributed to inflation during 2008-09 so far. Manufactured products inflation hardened to 10.9 
per cent on August 9, 2008 from 7.3 per cent at end-March 2008 (and 4.7 per cent a year ago) which, apart 
from metals, was due to increase in the prices of edible oils and oil cakes as well as recent firming up of 
textiles prices. Primary articles inflation firmed up to 11.8 per cent on August 9, 2008 from 9.7 per cent at 
end-March 2008, driven by the hardening of vegetables, raw cotton and oilseeds prices. Various measures 
of consumer price inflation were placed higher (7.3-9.4 per cent) in June/July 2008 than those in March 
2008 (6.0-7.9 per cent).  
In view of the lagged and cumulative effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand and 
assuming that supply management would be conducive, capital flows would be managed actively and in 
the absence of adversities emanating in the domestic or global economy,  the Annual Policy Statement in 
April 2008 noted that the policy endeavour would be to bring down inflation from the then high level of 
above 7.0 per cent to around 5.5 per cent in 2008-09 with a preference for bringing it as close to 5.0 per 
cent as soon as possible, while recognising the evolving complexities in globally transmitted inflation. 
According to the First Quarter Review while the policy actions would aim to bring down the prevailing 
intolerable level of inflation to a tolerable level of below 5.0 per cent as soon as possible and around 3.0 
per cent over the medium-term, a realistic policy endeavour would be to bring down inflation from the then 
prevailing level of about 11.0-12.0 per cent to a level close to 7.0 per cent by March 31, 2009.  
The overall stance of monetary policy in the Annual Policy Statement was stated broadly to ensure 
a monetary and interest rate environment that accorded high priority to price stability, well-anchored 
inflation expectations and orderly conditions in financial markets while being conducive to the continuation 
of the growth momentum. The First Quarter Review, while reiterating the Annual Policy stance for 2008-09, 
noted that there was an urgent need for monetary policy to address aggregate demand pressures, which 
were strongly in evidence, by continuing with measured responses on an ongoing basis, in a timely 
manner. Various measured responses beginning September 2004, which had moderated early signs of 
overheating that emerged in 2006-07, would continue to work in conjunction with supply side measures to 
bring down inflation to more acceptable levels in the near future.    
REAL SECTOR 
 
Agriculture 
The ongoing surge in global prices of major food items, which began in 2006, has significant 
implications for the domestic agricultural sector and overall macroeconomic and financial stability. Food 
prices have also hardened in India recently but the increase in wholesale prices of various crops in India 
has been of a much lower order in comparison with the increase in global food prices.  
In India, although the share of agriculture in real GDP has declined below one-fifth, it continues to 
be an important sector as it employs 52 per cent of the workforce. Boosting agricultural production, through 
increase in gross cropped area (multiple cropping), enhancement in irrigation coverage and improvement 
in productivity, has remained a challenge in the wake of flattening out of increase in net sown area. 
Furthermore, actual yields also lag the levels, which could be possible through improved practices, as 
noted by the Steering Committee on Agriculture for the Eleventh Plan. While trade and fiscal measures 
along with imports can address supply-demand mismatches in the short run, in the medium to long run, 
there is a need to ensure that domestic food management enables maintenance of adequate levels of 
buffer stocks.  Going forward, the overall improvement in foodgrains production and the rise in the level of 
buffer stocks would assuage supply shortages, dampen inflation expectations, economise on imports and 
fortify food security in the context of the intensifying food crisis worldwide. However, there is a need to 
carefully avoid the possible unintended consequences of building up buffer stocks for market supplies at a 
time when demand-supply gaps are already strained, while ensuring food security and maintaining price 
stability.  
The long-term solution lies in addressing structural weaknesses in agriculture such as exhaustion of 
yield potential of high yielding varieties of rice and wheat, unbalanced fertiliser use,  low seeds replacement 
rate, inadequate incentive system and post harvest value addition. Going forward, in order to reap the full 
potential in agriculture, greater focus needs to be placed on modernising the agricultural research system 
as success so far has been restricted to select crops. Investment in agriculture needs to be raised 
substantially. There is a need to promote agriculture diversification towards horticulture and livestock.  
There is also need to recognise the benefits of collective representation of farmers in the product and credit 
markets. It is imperative to ensure the efficient use of inputs such as water resources, seeds and fertilisers. 
For this purpose, farmers, if necessary, may be imparted necessary training by the local administration and 
research institutes. Despite significant increase in agricultural production, goals of self-sufficiency in food, 
food security and nutrition at the household level are yet to be achieved. The challenge, thus, lies in 
continuously working towards implementing the Government’s strategy of faster and more inclusive growth 
in its multiple dimensions. 
 
Industry and Infrastructure 
Industrial growth, which accelerated during the period 2002-03 to 2006-07, moderated in 2007-08, 
reflecting, apart from the base effect, some slowing down of domestic and external demand. Hardening of 
crude oil prices and spikes in commodity prices, which form inputs for the industrial sector, increased the 
costs of industrial production. Hardening of crude oil prices and spikes in commodity prices, which form 
inputs for the industrial sector, increased the costs of industrial production. The industrial sector faced 
several supply constraints emanating from the shortages in the cement and steel sectors, which were 
reflected in a spurt in their prices. Other constraints included industry-specific capacity limitations, 
inadequate power availability, transportation bottlenecks and other infrastructural services, which exerted 
pressure on the output. 
Performance of the infrastructure sector continues to be an area of concern. The performance of 
the electricity sector was adversely affected by capacity constraints, which were caused, inter alia, by 
problems relating to coal and ash handling units, and water availability. Such issues restrained the 
operationalisation of new units commercially and hampered power generation in both thermal and hydro 
plants. The slow progress in capacity additions has accentuated the power supply deficits and any slippage 
in achieving the targets may worsen the situation further in the face of increasing demand for power from 
industry and other sectors. While measures have been initiated to increase the coal production to meet the 
growing demand not only from the electricity sector but also from other utilities, environmental concerns 
and issues relating to rehabilitation of displaced population due to mining activities and construction of 
dams also need to be addressed proactively. In view of shortages and rising prices of petroleum products 
in recent times, keen interest is being shown globally in setting up of thermal power plants that are not 
based on oil. As such thermal plants are dependent on coal and gas, the thermal based additions to capacity in India would have implications for the cost of power generation due to increasing prices of gas 
and coal, and erratic gas supplies would lower plant load factor. Besides, a rise in mineral oil prices could 
also have an impact on gas prices, which would hamper the production of power. At the margin, renewable 
energy sources offer an alternative for meeting the growing demand for power. 
 
Services 
The service sector recorded double digit growth during the last three year period 2005-06 to 2007-
08, underpinned by a significant increase in demand for domestic services. The performance of the 
services sector in recent years has been robust. However, rise in international mineral oil prices poses a 
downside risk to the outlook. Rise in mineral prices may particularly affect the performance of the transport 
sector, which had 10.4 per cent weight in the services sector and constituted 6.4 per cent of GDP in 2006-
07.  A sharp increase in input prices of aviation fuels and petroleum products may also impinge on the 
pace of growth of this sector. The tourism sector, which heavily relies on various transport services, could 
also be impacted as tour package costs would soar impacting the hotel industry. Furthermore, as the 
services sector derives its demand to a large extent from the industrial sector, moderation in the industrial 
growth momentum might also impact the services sector growth prospects. 
The global slowdown raises uncertainties about prospects of external demand for both the industry 
and services sectors in India. Although Indian industry remains primarily domestic demand driven, there 
are some industries, including gems and jewellery, textiles and engineering goods which have higher 
dependence on external demand conditions. In the event of some export demand compression for some of 
India's manufactured exportable items, there could be some impact on certain segments of manufacturing. 
In respect of the services, only specific sectors, which have significant dependence on global markets, 
could be affected with the onset of recession in the global economy. In particular, the global recession 
could impact the trade sector, which, in turn, could affect the performance of the transportation sector. 
Further, recession could also limit business and leisure tourism, which, in turn, could have implications for 
the performance of hotels. Indian ITES-BPO industry remains highly dependent on external market 
conditions as India's ITES exports account for about two-thirds of its ITES-BPO revenues. The impact of 
recession on Indian ITES and BPO services, however, remains uncertain.  
 
FISCAL POLICY 
The Central Government was mandated under the FRBM Act to reduce its gross fiscal deficit-GDP 
ratio to three per cent and eliminate its revenue deficit by 2008-09. The fiscal correction process was set to 
continue in 2008-09 in tune with the legislative mandate with the Centre's gross fiscal deficit-GDP ratio 
budgeted to decline to 2.5 per cent during 2008-09. It, however, budgeted revenue deficit-GDP ratio at 1.0 
per cent and rescheduled its elimination by 2009-10, primarily in order to meet the necessary requirements 
of revenue expenditure-intensive programmes, particularly at the commencement of the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan. The systemic rigidity of non-Plan committed expenditures in the short run was another 
contributory factor.  
The management of public finances during the last four years, mandated under FRBM Act, 2003, 
has been broadly on track so far. The robust economic growth resulted in higher than anticipated tax 
revenues and created fiscal space for meeting the demand for resources. The revenue-led consolidation 
reflected the combined effect of a balanced and reasonable tax rate structure with fewer exemptions and 
wider coverage of tax base, and efficiency of tax administration. The ongoing reforms and fiscal correction 
initiatives, in turn, supported domestic demand and investment, thereby propelling economic growth. 
Notwithstanding the improved position, there are several underlying fiscal pressures that are not entirely 
evident in the headline fiscal indicators. Although the implementation of fiscal rules has had a positive 
effect of focusing attention on fiscal issues, there has been an increased recourse to other fiscal liabilities. 
The issuance of bonds has been resorted to frequently for financing not only fuel, food and fertiliser 
subsidies, but also deferred liabilities with regard to bank loan waivers and contribution to  capital of public 
sector banks. Although the issuance of such bonds does not directly increase the conventionally measured 
fiscal deficit, the proceeds from such bonds are used to effectively fund current subsidy expenditures. Their 
macroeconomic and financial market impacts and crowding out of resource availability to the private sector 
are similar to an expansion of the fiscal deficit. The significant quasi-fiscal transactions to finance recurrent 
revenue expenditures through de facto borrowings also create apprehensions about the quality of the fiscal 
consolidation process that is underway and poses challenges for fiscal, external and monetary 
management.   
While the need to eliminate revenue deficit and target a nominal limit on fiscal deficit is important, 
the mode of financing of the fiscal deficit and the appropriate use of resources so raised are equally 
important, particularly in the context of pressing requirements for adequate investment in social and 
financial infrastructure. Furthermore, there is a need to work towards durable fiscal correction and 
consolidation through fiscal empowerment, i.e., by expanding the scope and size of revenue flows. 
Exclusive focus on fiscal deficit may tend to reduce the role of the Government, thereby hampering the 
process of growth, especially when the focus is on inclusive growth. The Indian economy is undergoing 
structural transformation and it needs large investments in social and physical infrastructure. There is, 
therefore, a need to step up investment in certain critical areas such as education, health care and physical 
infrastructure. The role of fiscal authority also assumes importance in the light of ongoing financial 
turbulence across the world as it must be recognised that when everything else fails, it is only the fisc that 
has to take the hit and come to rescue. 
EXTERNAL SECTOR 
India's balance of payments is increasingly being influenced by global developments, reflecting its 
growing linkages with the rest of the world through real as well as financial flows. The ratio of merchandise 
exports to GDP has risen since the early 1990s. During 2002-2007, India's export growth was placed 
higher than its key competitors in the Asian region (except China). Simultaneously, import intensity has 
also risen steadily as domestic entities have expanded access to internationally available raw material and 
intermediate goods as well as quality inputs for providing the cutting edge to domestic production and 
export capabilities. Services exports, led by buoyancy in software and business services, and overseas 
remittances, have progressively become larger and more stable since the mid-1990s, thereby imparting 
resilience to India's invisible receipts. The net invisibles surplus has offset a significant part of the 
expanding trade deficit and helped in containing the current account deficit to an average of around one 
per cent of GDP since the early 1990s. With regard to the capital account also, India's linkages with the 
global economy are getting stronger, underpinned by the growing openness of the economy and two way 
movement in financial flows. In the capital account, the liberalised external payments regime has been 
facilitating the process of acquisition of foreign companies by Indian corporates, both in the manufacturing 
and services sectors, with the objectives of reaping economies of scale, access to technology knowhow 
and capturing offshore markets to face the global competition. Notwithstanding outflows, capital inflows 
(net) the period 2003-2008 on an average during remained higher than the average for any five-year period 
in the independent India. Persistently large capital inflows (net) above the current account deficit would 
also complicate the task of monetary and liquidity management, particularly in the face of liquidity 
pressures.  
In the medium term, the continued focus on financial market development could potentially mitigate 
the challenge of capital flows. However, it is important to recognise that the development of financial 
markets is a gradual process. Hence, while continuing to work on development of the financial markets, 
capital flows have to be managed through other tools in the short term. The gradual process of fuller capital 
account liberalisation could be pursued over the medium-term, keeping in view, particularly, the issues 
raised by recent financial market turbulence in advanced economies. Therefore, the issue is not either 
financial market development or management of capital account, but how much of each approach should 
be adopted in a given situation and over time while recognising and taking into account the scope and 
prospects for reforms in fiscal and real sectors.   
The overall approach to the management of India's foreign exchange reserves would continue to 
take into account the changing composition of the balance of payments and endeavour to reflect the 
'liquidity risks' associated with different types of flows and other requirements.  Furthermore, the reserves 
would continue to be invested in major economies, adhering to the principles of according priority to safety, 
liquidity and return. As regards the reserve management, a related issue is the valuation of foreign 
reserves on a marked-to-market basis on the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank. In this regard, the 
Reserve Bank has adopted a conservative accounting practice, whereby unrealised gains are not shown, 
while losses are booked.  
FINANCIAL SECTOR 
In recent years, the Reserve Bank has emphasised credit quality, improvement of the credit delivery 
system (with specific focus on agriculture, micro, small and medium enterprises) and financial inclusion. 
There has been significant increase in the credit flow to agriculture, small and medium enterprises and crop 
loans at administered interest rates. Various measures such as one-time settlement (OTS) and 
rescheduling/restructuring schemes for distressed farmers, simplification of procedures, adoption of 
business correspondent model and the use of smart cards have also facilitated increased credit to the rural 
sector. Furthermore, the linking of credit to a broader base of adjusted net bank credit, including their non-
SLR investments, in respect of priority sector targets, also seeks to promote credit to the priority sectors. 
While concessional credit and debt relief are intended to alleviate farmers' distress and reopen the credit 
lines that have been choked, sustaining an appropriate credit culture going forward would require incentive 
systems for greater flow and efficient allocation of credit. In consonance with the policy emphasis on 
gradual harmonisation with the international best practices, foreign banks operating in India and Indian 
banks having presence outside India have already migrated to the standardised approach for credit risk 
and the basic indicator approach for operational risk under Basel II with effect from March 31, 2008. All 
other scheduled commercial banks would migrate to these approaches under Basel II not later than March 
31, 2009. The Pillar 2 guidelines were issued during the year. Certain amendments were also carried out in 
the Basel II framework issued earlier. Newer avenues of raising capital were provided to banks to accord 
them with greater flexibility in meeting the Basel II requirement. Special emphasis was laid on liquidity and 
asset liability management. The policy initiatives also focussed on strengthening the corporate governance 
practices in banks and improving customer service.  
In contrast to the global situation, India has been, by and large, spared of global financial contagion 
resulting from the sub-prime turbulence for a variety of reasons. A few instances of pre-emptive regulation 
to ensure financial stability include, inter alia, prescription of a Board mandated policy in respect of real 
estate exposure of banks and increasing risk weights for various segments of the financial sector, 
provisioning against standard assets, norms on exposure to inter-bank liability, norms on financial 
regulation of systemically important NBFCs and banks' relationship with them, norms for securitisation and 
non-SLR investments and marking-to-market valuation norms. The regulatory guidelines are supplemented 
by moral suasion and supervisory review.  The Reserve Bank's broad approach to financial sector reforms 
has been to develop institutional and financial infrastructure and lay down appropriate regulatory and 
supervisory regime to ensure financial stability consistent with the overall objectives of growth with price 
stability. The pace of reforms has been contingent upon putting in place appropriate systems and 
procedures, technologies and market practices. In recent years, a new challenge for the financial sector in 
the context of inclusive growth is how to extend itself and innovate to meet the demands for financial 
inclusion and respond adequately to new opportunities and risks. Innovative channels for credit delivery for 
serving the new credit needs need to be developed, perhaps with greater use of information technology 
and intensified skills development in human capital.  
MONETARY POLICY 
The monetary policy stance of withdrawing monetary accommodation continued during 2007-08. In 
view of unprecedented turbulence in global financial markets since end-July 2007 following the sub-prime 
crisis and the unconventional policy response of major central banks, monetary policy resolved to be 
vigilant and proactive in cushioning the real economy from excess volatility in financial markets (October 
2007/January 2008). This warranted more intensified monitoring and swift responses with all the available 
instruments to preserve and maintain domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. While domestic 
factors dominated the policy stance, monetary policy recognised the risks to inflation from high and volatile 
international food, fuel and metal prices.  In view of these factors, the stance of monetary policy in January 
2008 focused on swift response to the evolving constellation of adverse international developments and to 
the domestic situation impinging on inflation expectations, financial stability and growth momentum, with 
both conventional and unconventional measures, as appropriate on a continuing basis. In view of 
heightened global uncertainties and mounting inflationary pressures from escalated and volatile food and 
energy prices, which possibly contained some structural components, and persistence of demand 
pressures, albeit with some improvement in supply response, monetary policy in April 2008 noted that 
while it had to respond proactively to immediate concerns, it could not afford to ignore considerations over 
a longer term perspective with respect to overall macroeconomic prospects. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank 
emphasised the need to demonstrate on a continuing basis the determination to act decisively, effectively 
and swiftly to curb any signs of adverse developments with regard to inflation expectations. In view of 
unprecedented uncertainties and dilemmas, it also emphasised the importance of taking informed 
judgements with regard to the timing and magnitude of policy actions based on an evaluation of incoming 
information on a continuous basis.  In line with the stance set out in April 2008, monetary policy underlined the need to eschew any 
further intensification of inflationary pressures and firmly anchor inflation expectations. Mirroring inflation 
trends in many advanced as well as emerging economies, inflation in India also hardened significantly in 
recent months above the Reserve Bank's tolerable level, amidst strong evidence of aggregate demand 
pressures, exacerbated by the slack in the supply response. Recognising that high and volatile energy 
prices were not a temporary phenomenon and the evolving complexities in globally transmitted inflation, 
the First Quarter Review (July 2008) accorded the highest priority to bringing down inflation from the 
prevailing high levels to a level close to 7.0 per cent by end-March 2009 and stabilising inflationary 
expectations.  
The conduct of monetary policy has become more challenging recently for a variety of factors. First, 
it is necessary to recognise the global dimensions of the crisis, which is threatening the credibility of 
monetary policy world wide. Second, localised factors such as banks' balance sheet adjustments in the 
run-up to the year-end closure of accounts and advance tax flows have also influenced liquidity conditions. 
Third, the evolving fiscal situation in an atmosphere of persistent inflationary pressures poses severe 
challenges to monetary management, especially if supply inelasticities continue to prevail in the short-term. 
Thus, there is a need to ensure that effectiveness of monetary policy is not undermined by fiscal 
expansion. Fourth, it is necessary to recognise that monetary policy has also to reckon with the structural 
components embedded in the drivers of inflation which, unlike cyclical elements, are somewhat impervious 
in the short run to instruments of aggregate demand management. Fifth, it needs to be recognised that 
existence of stipulated SLR prescription of 25 per cent of net domestic demand and time liabilities of banks 
hampers the genuine development of the government securities market. Sixth, the heightened uncertainty 
surrounding global financial markets and the unusual policy responses of major central banks suggest that 
the threats to global growth and stability that loom over the near-term horizon, continue to be significant, for 
the evolving monetary policy stance in 2008-09. Seventh, although growth rates of monetary and banking 
aggregates have started to dip since June 2008 in line with the projected trajectories, the demand for bank 
credit continues to be strong. Finally, the continued dominance of administered interest rates in some form 
or the other indicates that the extent of monetary policy measures needs to take cognisance of rigidities in 
transmission on this account. 
As the inflation rates have hardened beyond tolerable levels, monetary policy would continue to 
address aggregate demand pressures which appear to be strongly in evidence. However, at the same 
time, there is need to improve supply position in some critical sectors. In order to tackle food price inflation, 
the demand-supply mismatches need to be addressed over the medium term, which, would necessitate 
raising crop yields through the use of modern technology, improved irrigation facilities as well as provision 
of market-based incentive systems for the farmers both in the credit and product markets. An overriding 
priority for monetary policy would be to eschew any further intensification of inflationary pressures.   
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
Press Release: 2008-2009/261 
 