PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 www.rbi.org.in 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
       
January 21, 2008 
 
Government of Tripura  signs MoU 
with Reserve Bank of India 
 
The Government of Tripura and the Reserve Bank of India have, on January 
21, 2008 signed a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to Urban Co-
operative Banks in the State of Tripura. Consequent upon this, a State  level Task 
Force on Urban Co-operative Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for Tripura.  
Smt. Sewali Choudhury, Regional Director for North Eastern States, Reserve Bank 
of India, is the Chairman of the TAFCUB and Shri Swapan Saha, Registrar of 
Cooperative Societies, Government of Tripura, is its Co-Chairman. The other 
members of the TAFCUB include a representative, each from State and National 
Federation of Urban Cooperative Banks, a nominee of State Government of Tripura 
and a representative of Urban Banks Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central 
Office, Mumbai. The first meeting of the TAFCUB will be held shortly. 
 
Similar MoUs have also been signed with the Governments of the States of 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, 
Chattisgarh, Goa, Maharashtra, Haryana, National Capital Territory of Delhi, West 
Bengal and Assam. 
 
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing 
the training, computerization needs of the Urban Co-operative Bank/s in the State of 
Tripura with the objective of upgrading their human resources skills and 
technological infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and 
quality of management information systems. 
 
It may be recalled that in the Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy announced in 
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a Vision Document for Urban 
Co-operative Banks would be prepared.  Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in 
public domain a draft Vision Document in March 2005. As the Urban Co-operative 
Banks are subject to dual control by the Reserve Bank and the State Governments, 
the Vision Document envisaged the signing of MoU between State Governments and 
the Reserve Bank of India to put in place an arrangement through which there is a 
convergence on the approach and remedial actions required to be taken for 
facilitating the development of the sector.  The Vision Document also proposed the 
constitution of a State level Task Force for Urban Co-operative Banks with 
representatives of State Government, State/National Federation   of Urban 
Cooperative Banks and the Reserve Bank of India as its members, for the purpose 
of identifying the potentially viable urban co-op. banks and drawing up a time-bound 
action plan for their revival by setting specific monitorable milestones. 
 
 
G. Raghuraj 
Press Release : 2007-08/957                                               Deputy General Manager 