PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 www.rbi.org.in 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
February 18, 2008 
 
ATMs of Banks: Fair Pricing and Enhanced Access 
 
The Approach Paper on "ATMs of Banks: Fair Pricing and Enhanced 
Access" was placed on the website on 24th December 2007 for public comments. 
The comments received from the public as also banks were mostly in favour of the 
approach suggested in the paper. 
 
A paper examining the public comments and proposed guidelines in the 
form of circular to be issued to banks has been placed today on the RBI website. 
Comments can be e-mailed or faxed to 022-22659566 or letter addressed to Chief 
General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Payment and Settlement 
Systems, Central Office, 14th floor, Central Office Building, SBS Marg, Mumbai 
400001 latest by 25th February 2008. 
 
 
Ajit Prasad 
                      Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1095 ATMs of Banks: Fair Pricing and Enhanced Access 
 
Recently the Reserve Bank of India had examined the issue of the usage and 
pricing of ATMs of banks and placed an Approach Paper on the RBI website on 
24th December 2007 with 31st January 2008 as the time frame for receipt of 
public comments. The Approach suggested the service charges to be levied by 
banks for offering ATM service may be as under: 
 
Service Prop  osed charges 
For use of own ATMs for any Free 
purpose 
 
For use of other bank ATMs for Free 
balance enquiries 
 
For use of other bank ATMs for 
• No bank shall increase the 
cash withdrawals 
charges prevailing as on 
 
December 23, 2007 
• Banks which are charging more 
than Rs.20 per transaction 
shall reduce the charges to 
Rs.20 per transaction by March 
31, 2008 
• Free - with effect from April 1, 
2009. 
 
2. A number of comments were received from members of public, banks and 
Indian Bank's Association (IBA). The gist of the comments received are as under: 
   
Comments from Public: Comments received from the public were 
overwhelmingly in favour of making the service free and ensuring enhanced 
access. A few have suggested making the service free immediately instead of 
April 2009. On the other hand, some respondents apprehend that such a move of 
making service charges free may decelerate the deployment of ATMs by the 
acquiring banks.  
 Comments from banks: All the major banks who own a substantially large 
number of ATMs have welcomed the regulatory move for enhanced access to 
ATM facility by bank customers. However, some of them have suggested that 
instead of making the service totally free, number of free withdrawals in a quarter 
/ month can either be prescribed or left to individual banks. Two banks suggested 
that certain nominal charges should be prescribed.  
 
IBA in its comments have indicated that banks are in favour of greater financial 
inclusion and fairness and transparency in levy of charges. However, banks fear 
that availability of free ATM services at convenient locations could lead to an 
increase in the number of transactions and a reduction in the amount withdrawn 
per transaction. IBA has suggested that the number of free transactions at ATMs 
of other banks be restricted to two per month. Also in metro centres, the minimum 
cash withdrawal may be stipulated at Rs.500 for account other than no-frill 
accounts. Also cap to be fixed for balance enquiry as such transactions also 
attract interchange. 
 
The other suggestions made by banks / IBA are as under: 
(i) third party advertisement on the ATMs may be permitted as a 
revenue stream for the banks 
(ii) white label ATMs be permitted 
(iii) Cash withdrawal at the point of sale may be permitted so that the 
load on the ATMs be reduced. 
 
3. Thus it is observed that the approach has been found to be generally 
acceptable. The suggestions on third party advertisement, white label ATMs and 
cash withdrawal at the point of sale had been examined at depth earlier and it 
had been decided not to implement the same. Circumstances have not changed 
significantly warranting a review. As regards a cap on the number of free cash 
withdrawals in a month, the same is neither desirable nor practical. A draft 
guidelines in the form of circular to be issued to banks has been prepared 
accordingly and placed at the Annex. 
 
4. Members of public and the stakeholders like banks and IBA are requested to 
offer their comments on the draft guidelines / circular latest by 25th February 
2008. 
 2Annex  
 
DRAFT CIRCULAR TO BE ISSUED TO BANKS 
 
RBI.No. / / 2007-2008 
February …., 2008 
 
 
The Chairman / CEOs 
(All Scheduled commercial banks including RRBs) 
 
Dear Sir 
 
Customer charges for use of ATMs for cash withdrawal and balance enquiry 
 
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) have gained prominence as a delivery channel for 
banking transactions in India. Banks have been deploying ATMs to increase their reach. 
While ATMs facilitate a variety of banking transactions for customers, their main utility 
has been for cash withdrawal and balance enquiry. As at the end of October 2007, the 
number of ATMs deployed in India was 31,078. Commensurate with the branch network, 
larger banks have deployed more ATMs. Most banks prefer to deploy ATMs at locations 
where they have a large customer base or expect considerable use. To increase the 
usage of ATMs as a delivery channel, banks have also entered into bilateral or 
multilateral arrangements with other banks to have inter-bank ATM networks. 
 
2. It is evident that the charges levied on the customers vary from bank to bank and also 
vary according to the ATM network that is used for the transaction. Consequently, a 
customer is not aware, before hand, of the charges that will be levied for a particular 
ATM transaction, while using an ATM of another bank. This generally discourages the 
customer from using the ATMs of other banks. It is, therefore, essential to ensure greater 
transparency. 
 
3. International experience indicates that in countries such as UK, Germany and France, 
bank customers have access to all ATMs in the country, free of charge except when 
cash is withdrawn from white label ATMs or from ATMs managed by non-bank entities. 
There is also a move, internationally, to regulate the fee structure by the regulator from 
the public policy angle. The ideal situation is that a customer should be able to access 
any ATM installed in the country free of charge through an equitable cooperative 
initiative by banks. 
 
4. In view of this, RBI had placed on its website an Approach paper and sought public 
comments. The comments received have been analysed. Based on the feed back a 
framework of service charges would be implemented by all banks as under: 
 3 
Sr.No. Service  Charges 
(i) For use of own ATMs for any Free 
purpose (with immediate effect) 
 
(2) For use of other bank ATMs for Free 
balance enquiries (with immediate effect) 
 
(3) For use of other bank ATMs for cash • No bank shall increase the 
withdrawals 
charges prevailing as on 
 
December 23, 2007 (i.e. the 
date of release of Approach 
Paper on RBI website) 
• Banks which are charging 
more than Rs.20 per 
transaction shall reduce the 
charges to a maximum of 
Rs.20 per transaction by 
March 31, 2008 
• Free - with effect from April 
1, 2009. 
 
5. For the services at (1) and (2) above, the customer will not be levied any charge under 
any other head and the service will be totally free. 
 
6. For the service number (3) the charge of Rs.20/- indicated will be all inclusive and no 
other charges will be levied to the customers under any other head irrespective of the 
amount of withdrawal.  
 
7. Please acknowledge the receipt of the circular. A copy of the circular issued to your 
branches on this subject may please be submitted to us in due course. 
 
Yours faithfully 
 
 
 4