PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 www.rbi.org.in 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
  
April 11, 2008 
 
Government of Uttar Pradesh signs MoU 
with Reserve Bank of India 
 
The Government of Uttar Pradesh and the Reserve Bank of India have, on April 
11, 2008 signed a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to Urban Co-operative 
Banks in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Consequent upon this, a State level Task Force on 
Urban Co-operative Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for Uttar Pradesh.  Shri 
D.P.S.Rathore, Regional Director for Uttar Pradesh, Reserve Bank of India, is the 
Chairman of the TAFCUB and Shri Suresh Chandra, Registrar of Cooperative Societies, 
Government of Uttar Pradesh is its Co-Chairman.  The other members of the TAFCUB 
include a representative, each from State and National Federation of Urban Cooperative 
Banks, a nominee of State Government of Uttar Pradesh and a representative of Urban 
Banks Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai. The first meeting of 
the TAFCUB will be held shortly. 
Similar MoUs have also been signed with the Governments of the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, 
Chattisgarh, Goa, Maharashtra, Haryana, National Capital Territory of Delhi, West 
Bengal, Assam, Tripura and Punjab. 
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing the 
training, computerization needs of the  Urban Co-operative Banks in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh with the objective of upgrading their human resources skills and technological 
infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and quality of 
management information systems. 
It may be recalled that in the Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy announced in 
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a Vision Document for Urban Co-
operative Banks would be prepared.  Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in public 
domain a draft Vision Document in March 2005. As the Urban Co-operative Banks are 
subject to dual control by the Reserve Bank and the State Governments, the Vision 
Document envisaged the signing of MoU between State Governments and the Reserve 
Bank of India to put in place an arrangement through which there is a convergence on 
the approach and remedial actions required to be taken for facilitating the development 
of the sector.  The Vision Document also proposed the constitution of a State level Task 
Force of Urban Co-operative Banks with representatives of State Government, 
State/National Federation   of Urban Cooperative Banks and the Reserve Bank of India 
as its members, for the purpose of identifying the potentially viable urban co-operative 
banks and drawing up a time-bound action plan for their revival by setting specific 
monitorable milestones. 
                                     
     
     Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1324  
 