PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 18, 2005
RBI mourns demise of Dr. I. G. Patel
The employees of the Reserve Bank of India passed the following
resolution at the condolence meeting:
We have learnt with profound sorrow the sad demise of Dr. I.G. Patel,
former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India. Dr. Patel was Governor of the
Bank from December 1, 1977 to September 15, 1982.
Dr. Patel was at the helm of affairs in the Reserve Bank at a very
difficult time and grappled with a variety of complex issues with a sense of
vision, purpose and firmness combined with fairness. His tenure witnessed
the demonetisation of high denomination notes, nationalisation of six private
sector banks, introduction of targets for priority sector lending and
departmental reorganization in the Bank. He played active role in availing of
the Extended Fund Facility, the largest in the history of IMF, in 1981 due to
the balance of payments difficulties. As Governor of the Bank, he upheld the
highest traditions of Central Banking and made invaluable contributions to the
evolution of monetary and banking policy. Even after retirement he was
closely associated as Chairman of the Committee for writing of History of the
RBI and as a Member of the Board of Management of the Indira Gandhi
Institute of Development Research and as Chairman of the Committee for
Licensing of New Private Sector Banks.
Dr. Patel, known to his close friends and colleagues as 'IG' had a
distinguished academic career. Before coming to the Bank, he held many
important positions in the Central Government like the Chief Economic
Adviser, Adviser in the Planning Commission and Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs in the Ministry. 
It was appropriate that Dr. Patel's distinguished career should
culminate in his appointment as the First Asian Director of the London School
of Economics in 1984. In recognition of his outstanding contribution in the
fields of economics, finance, scholarship and education, in Britain and the
Commonwealth, Dr. Patel was awarded an honorary Knighthood of the British
Empire (KBE).
We express our deep sympathy to his wife, Smt. Alaknanda Patel and
their daughter, Ms. Rehana and other members of the family in their
bereavement.
         G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/79