PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 31, 2005
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers:
Summer, Monsoon and Winter 2004 Issue
The Reserve Bank of India today released the combined Summer, Monsoon
and Winter 2004 issue of its Occasional Papers. The Occasional Papers is the
research journal of the Reserve Bank. It contains contribution of the Reserve Bank's
staff and reflects the views of the authors. The Issue contains a rich fare of articles,
special notes and book reviews.
The first paper entitled 'Liquidity Adjustment in Value at Risk (VaR) Model:
Evidence from the Indian Debt Market’ by Sunando Roy argues that conventional
VaR models are severely constrained while dealing with liquidity risk. Standard VaR
model assumes that any quantity of securities can be traded without influencing
market prices. In reality, most markets are less than perfectly liquid and many
securities cannot be traded with ease in markets. As a consequence, several
securities exhibit very low levels of turnover in the secondary segment of the debt
market. Also, in most cases, measures of market risk fail to capture the costs of
carrying illiquid assets in their portfolio. This becomes a constraining factor for
market growth. In this context, the paper attempts to construct a Liquidity adjusted
VaR model (L-VaR model) that incorporates liquidity risk in Value at Risk models.
The paper tests the performance of L-VaR model vis-a-vis existing VaR models and
finds that in the Indian context, the liquidity risk is an important component of the
aggregate risks absorbed by the financial institutions.
The second paper entitled ‘The Interbank Money Market in India: Evidence on
Volatility, Efficacy of  Regulatory Initiatives and Implications for Interest Rate
Targeting’ by Himanshu Joshi stresses that the stability of the call money rate is of
critical  importance to central banks which view it as an operational target to signal
the stance of monetary policy. Experience shows that regulatory initiatives taken to
improve the efficiency of market functioning help in fostering market stability. In the
Indian case, for example, permitting a wider section of market constituents to
operate in the repos market (viz., outside the central bank) since March  2003 has
led to a reduction in the volatility of the call money rate caused by improved
matching of demand/supply between  deficit/surplus segments. The paper assesses
the volatility pattern of the call money rate during the last 3 years and estimates its
sensitivity vis-à-vis the RBI's LAF auction decisions for the purpose of eliciting
underlying market characteristics. The paper also finds that volatility in the
Government securities market is significantly influenced by money market volatility.
The third paper entitled ‘Boom and Slump Periods in the Indian IPO Market’
by Saurabh Ghosh attempts a detailed investigation of the boom and slump phases
in the Indian primary capital market. It concentrates on two key variables, namely,
IPO volume and initial returns and analyses their nature and interrelation during
these two periods.  The paper finds: (a) a firm's decision to go public over the lastdecade depended on the number of other companies that were getting listed over
the previous months; (b) the issuers' did not depend on the information content of the
initial returns while taking their decision to go public; (c) no significant influence of
industry affiliation on the IPOs during the boom period; and (d) more established
firms have greater likelihood to get listed on the capital market to raise large
amounts and underprice more during the slump period.
Special Notes
The first note in this section entitled ‘A Revisit’ by S.L.N.Simha – who was the
Editor of the First Volume of the History of the Reserve bank of India - is a detailed
Preface to the forthcoming reprint of the First Volume of the History. The note
provides important and interesting aspects of the background of the History that may
contribute to a full understanding of the contents of the History and to give the
readers the full fledged background.
The second note in this section entitled ‘Trends in Total Factor Productivity of
Manufacturing Sector in West Bengal: A Sectoral and Temporal Analysis’ by Sadhan
Kumar Chattopadhyay seeks to examine the overall industrial scenario of West
Bengal for the past three decades. The paper studies the productivity of capital and
labour for the two-digit industry groups and the total factor productivity (TFP) of the
manufacturing sector of West Bengal as a whole vis-à-vis all-India and also for some
selected groups of industries for West Bengal. It finds that productivity of capital of
the West Bengal’s manufacturing sector has declined, while labour productivity has
increased. TFP of the West Bengal manufacturing sector as a whole has been
declining, while it has been increasing in case of India. TFP of six industry groups
which played a dominant role during the early 1960s has gone down except Jute
industry, which itself is a dying industry. That means no new industry groups have
come up to take up the position of these industries, which have been performing
badly.
The third note entitled ‘International Trade in Goods: Performance of India vis-
à-vis a Few Important Economies in South and East Asia’ by P. Bhuyan analyses
India’s performance in international trade in goods with a few important economies in
South and East Asia, viz., China, Hong Kong SAR (China), Taiwan (China),
Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. The
paper finds that that although performance by India in merchandise trade did not
compare well with these economies, India managed a less concentrated trade
structure in products exported than many of the economies under study. On the
other hand, a more concentrated trade structure signified India’s imports trade.
The above book is also available on our website (www.rbi.org.in) under
publication section.
 Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/527