PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 24, 2005
RBI places Draft Report of the Internal Technical Group on Forex Markets in
Public Domain for Comments
As a part of the continuing efforts aimed at liberalising and developing the
forex market in India, an Internal Technical Group on Forex Markets was recently
formed in the Reserve Bank of India to undertake a comprehensive review of
measures initiated by the Reserve Bank of India subsequent to the Report of the
Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India (Sodhani Committee)
published in 1995 and identify areas for further liberalisation/ relaxation of
restrictions. The Group recently submitted the draft report. The Reserve Bank of
India has placed the draft report of the Group on its website (www.rbi.org.in).
Views/comments may be sent to cgmincfed@rbi.org.in or arajlakshmi@rbi.org.in or
faxed to 022- 22611427.
The Group had the benefit of presentations by select market participants and
experts on relevant areas. The international experience in respect of market
liberalisation in certain major emerging market countries was also studied.
The Group took stock of the overall macro economic environment to formulate
an optimal approach towards forex market and capital account liberalisation. It noted
that although the external sector is fundamentally stronger and more resilient than
ever before, some of the pre-conditions for further liberalisation laid down by the
Tarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility are yet to be achieved. In
order to embark upon further deregulation of the foreign exchange market, including
relaxation of the remaining capital controls, an enabling environment is needed for
the reforms to proceed on a sustainable basis. In this context, liberalisation of
various sectors of the economy has to proceed in tandem to derive synergies of the
reform process. The Group  also took  into account the risks associated with
internationalisation of the rupee and  concluded that a gradual and need-based
approach would be more suited to the prevailing condition.
The Group has proposed the following measures for implementation in the
short-term :
Resident Entities
1. To provide greater flexibility to resident entities in dynamically managing their
exposures, to further the development of the forward segment of the market and
to bring about uniformity with respect to booking of such contracts, all forward
contracts booked by residents, regardless of tenor, may be allowed to be
cancelled and rebooked freely. Foreign currency-rupee swaps booked to hedge
genuine foreign currency exposures may also be permitted to be
rebooked/reinstated on cancellation. Currency swaps enabling a corporate to
move from a rupee exposure to a foreign currency exposure, once cancelled,
cannot be rebooked.2
2.  Corporates who have derived foreign exchange exposures arising from rupee-
foreign currency swaps may be permitted to hedge the interest rate risk and
cross currency exposures (not involving the rupee).
3.  Corporates may be permitted to sell/write covered call and put options subject
to adequate accounting standards and risk management systems being in
place.
Banks
1. Greater liberalisation requires greater control and discretion with banks.
Banks need to evaluate the purpose of the derivative transaction being
offered to their customers and make an assessment as to whether it is
appropriate to the needs and level of sophistication of the customers. All
banks may be required to put in place a customer suitability and
appropriateness policy.
2. Banks may be permitted to provide capital on the actual overnight open
exchange position maintained by them, rather than on their open position
limits.
3. Banks may be given the freedom to decide on the period of crystallisation of
unpaid export bills. The exchange gain and loss on crystallisation may be
passed on to exporters symmetrically.
4. Banks having expertise in managing commodity price risk and hence
specifically authorised by the Reserve Bank in this regard, may be allowed to
approve commodity hedging proposals from their corporate customers.
5. The closing time for inter-bank foreign exchange market in India may be
extended by one hour from 4.00 PM to 5.00 PM.
6. Forex data, including traded volumes for derivatives, such as, foreign
currency-rupee options, may be made available to the market on a regular
basis.
Non resident entities
Apart from US dollar (US$), Pound sterling (GBP), Euro and Japanese yen
(JPY), Foreign Currency Non-Resident (FCNR) (B) deposits may also be accepted
in Canadian dollar (CAD), Australian dollar (AUD) and New Zealand dollar (NZD).
  Alpana Killawala
        Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1362