PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 23, 2005
Effective October 8, Outright Trading in Government Securities
to be discontinued on Saturdays
Starting October 8, 2005, there will be no outright transactions in Government
securities on Saturdays, the Reserve Bank of India has announced. Government
securities traded on Fridays on T+1 basis will be settled on Mondays or the next
working day in case Monday is a holiday. The announcement meets a long standing
demand of market participants as well as their representative bodies.
Market participants and their representative bodies, such as, the Fixed Income
Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and the Primary Dealers
Association of India (PDAI) had a long standing demand for closure of the Government
securities market on Saturdays. This was placed before the Technical Advisory
Committee on Money, Foreign Exchange and Government Securities (TAC) at its
meeting held today. The TAC discussed various operational aspects and recommended
the discontinuation of outright transactions in Government securities on Saturdays.
Accordingly, starting October 8, 2005, there will be no outright transactions in
Government securities on Saturdays. Government securities traded on Fridays on T+1
basis will be settled on Mondays or the next working day in case Monday is a holiday.
Transactions in call/notice/term money, Collateralised Borrowing and Lending
Obligations (CBLO) and repos among market participants will continue to be undertaken
on Saturdays as at present. Negotiated Dealing System (NDS), clearing and Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS) system would also operate as usual.
It may be mentioned that the stock markets and foreign exchange markets do not
function on Saturdays. With discontinuation of outright transactions in government
securities on Saturday, there will now be closer alignment of the various market
segments in terms of business days.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/378