PRESS RELEASE
`
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 15, 2005
HIV/AIDS Workplace Policy Statement
The Reserve Bank of India (the Bank) has an enduring commitment to being
alive and sensitive to the social, health and ethical issues confronting its employees and
their families. As the central bank of the country, it also seeks to catalyze similar
enabling conditions in the banking industry and indeed the country as a whole.
The Bank recognizes that HIV/AIDS is not only a health problem, but also an
issue that impacts productivity and well being of individuals in the workplace. It,
accordingly, commits itself to having a work environment in which affected employees
are not discriminated against and are treated justly, humanely and in a life-affirming
manner.
The purpose of this policy, which is based on the National HIV/AIDS policy of
India, is to guide the Bank’s response to the HIV/AIDS. It provides the broad framework
to handle workplace and other related issues concerning the staff and their families as
well as situations that arise in the context of HIV/AIDS.
The key elements of the Bank’s HIV/AIDS policy are:
Non-discrimination
Employees living with HIV/AIDS shall be afforded the same rights and privileges,
and will have the same obligations, as all other employees.
Employees will not be discriminated against in terms of employment or
advancement in employment, on the basis of their actual or perceived HIV/AIDS status.
Employees with HIV/ AIDS will be managed in the same manner as those with
any other progressive or debilitating illness.
Confidentiality and disclosure
Employees have the right to confidentiality about their HIV/AIDS status and are
not obliged to inform management about their HIV/AIDS status.
Information of an employee's HIV status shall be kept confidential and shall not be
disclosed to any other person without the employee's consent.
Voluntary counseling and testing
There will be no pre-employment HIV/AIDS testing in the Bank.
The Bank will support and promote the provision of Voluntary Counseling and Testing
(VCT) to employees with regard to HIV/AIDS.
Prevention, Education and Awareness
The Bank will sensitise all employees regarding issues related to HIV/AIDS and
also provide information and education on ways of preventing and controlling it.
Management of people infected by HIV/AIDS
The Bank will set up a Committee/s to implement the HIV/AIDS policy, look into
related issues, evolve programmes and assess/suggest policy changes from time to
time.
   P. V. Sadanandan
 Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/66