PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 4, 2005
RBI to revise NEER/REER Indices
The Reserve Bank of India is replacing its five-country indices of Nominal
Effective Exchange Rate (NEER) and Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) with new
six-currency indices. It is also revising its thirty six-country indices. As against the
present practice of having three base years in the case of existing five-country indices,
viz., 1991-92, 1993-94 and 2003-04, the last being a moving base updated every year
to facilitate comparison with a more recent period, the new six-currency indices will
have 1993-94 as fixed base and 2003-04 as a moving base, which would change every
year as at present.
The new six-currency indices will include U.S.A, Eurozone, U.K., Japan, China
and Hong Kong SAR. The new indices will also have two new currencies - both Asian -
the Chinese Renminbi and the Hong Kong Dollar. Two currencies in the existing five-
country series, viz., French Franc and Deutsche Mark have been replaced by Euro in
the new indices. The existing five-country indices use fixed trade weights, which are
based on the average of India's bilateral trade (exports plus imports) with the countries
in the index during the five-year period from 1992-93 to 1996-97. The new indices will
use 3-year moving average trade weights in place of the present fixed trade weights in
order to suitably reflect the changing pattern of India’s foreign trade with its major
trading partners. China and Hong Kong SAR, for instance, have become India’s
important trading partners and together accounted for around 9 per cent of India’s
foreign trade in 2004-05, of which China’s share was 6.1 per cent. The six
countries/regions, represented by the six currencies, together accounted for around 40
per cent of India’s total foreign trade in 2004-05 as compared with a lower coverage of
around 22 per cent of India’s total foreign trade in the case of the existing five-country
index. The inclusion of China and Hong Kong SAR reflects an increasing recognition of
the Indian economy’s rapidly growing integration with the rest of Asia.
The Reserve Bank is also revising the thirty six-country REER/NEER series. The
new series has been constructed with 1993-94 as the base year as against 1985 as the
base year in the existing indices. The new series comprises a revised set of currencies
for better representation of countries which have a significant share in India’s foreign
trade. The revised set includes Hong Kong SAR, Denmark, Iran, Kuwait, Qatar, Russia,
South Africa, Sweden and United Arab Emirates. Besides, with the expansion of the
Eurozone, the new indices include all the twelve countries that have Euro as common
currency. The revised thirty six countries/regions, represented by the thirty six
currencies, together accounted for around 76 per cent of India’s total foreign trade in
2004-05 as compared with a lower coverage of around 60 per cent of India’s total
foreign trade in the case of the existing indices. As in case of the revised indices of the
six-currency REER/NEER, the thirty six-currency indices also use 3-year moving
average weights (both exports and trade weights) in the construction of the new series,keeping in view the rapid change in the direction of trade in contrast to the fixed weights
used hitherto for constructing REER/NEER series.
The Reserve Bank of India has been constructing five-country and thirty six-
country indices of NEER and REER as part of its communication policy and to aid
researchers and analysts.  At present, the five-country (U.S.A, Germany, France, Japan
and U.K) as well as thirty six-country NEER and REER indices are published in the RBI
Bulletin every month.
 Detailed notes on the new six-currency and thirty six-currency indices of
REER/NEER along with time-series data will be published in the December 2005 issue
of the RBI Bulletin.
                  Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/543