PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
        September 6, 2005
Government of Karnataka signs MOU with Reserve Bank of India
The Government of Karnataka and the Reserve Bank of India on
September 5, 2005 have signed a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to
urban cooperative banks in the state of Karnataka. Consequent upon this, a state
level Task Force on Urban Cooperative Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for
Karnataka. Smt. Devaki Muthukrishnan, Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for
the state of Karnataka is the Chairperson of the TAFCUB and Shri
K.H.Gopalakrishne Gowda, Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Karnataka its co-
chairman. The other members of the TAFCUB are: a nominee of the State
Government of Karnataka, Shri K.R Ananda, Chief General Manager, RBI,
Bangalore as representative of Central Office, Urban Banks Department, Reserve
Bank of India, Mumbai, Shri Manohar Maski representing the National Federation of
Urban Banks (NAFCUB), New Delhi, and Shri M. Shantaram representing the State
Urban Banks Federation. The first meeting of the TAFCUB will be held soon.
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing
the training, computerisation needs of the urban cooperative banks in the state of
Karnataka with the objective of upgrading their human resources skills and
technological infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and
quality of management information systems.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-term Review of Annual Policy announced in
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a vision document for urban
cooperative banks would be prepared.  Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in
public domain a draft vision document in March 2005.  Based on the responses
received, the vision document is being finalised.
As the urban cooperative banks are subject to dual control by the Reserve
Bank and state governments, the vision document envisaged the signing of
Memorandum of Understanding between State Governments and the Reserve Bank
of India to put in place an arrangement through which there is a convergence on the
approach and remedial actions required to be taken for facilitating the development
of the sector. The vision document also proposed the constitution of a State Level
Task Force of Urban Cooperative Banks, under the chairmanship of Regional
Director of the Reserve Bank for the concerned state with Registrar of Cooperative
Societies as the co-chairman and representatives from the State and the National
Federation for Urban Cooperative Banks (NAFCUB) among others, as its members,
for the purpose of identifying the potentially viable urban cooperative banks and
drawing up a time bound action plan for their revival by setting specific monitorable
milestones.
     P. V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/294