PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 11, 2005
RBI Working Group on Warehouse Receipts and
 Commodity Futures submits Report
In accordance with the announcement made by the Governor, Reserve
Bank of India in the Mid-term Review of the Annual Policy Statement for the year
2004-05, RBI had constituted a Working Group on Warehouse Receipts and
Commodity Futures with Shri Prashant Saran, Chief General Manager as
Chairman. Other members included representatives of Indian Banks' Association
(IBA), Forward Markets Commission (FMC), NABARD, SBI, Punjab National
Bank, Bank of Baroda and ICICI Bank Ltd. The Working Group was entrusted
with the task of evolving broad guidelines, criteria, limits, risk management
system as also a legal framework for facilitating participation of banks in
commodity (derivative) market. The Group was also asked to suggest enabling
measures, including necessary statutory amendments to impart negotiable status
to Warehouse Receipts, to encourage flow of institutional finance to farmers.
The Working Group has submitted its report, which examines the existing
situation, furnishes relevant international experience and suggests the possible
course of action on various issues. The Group has recommended that banks
may be permitted to offer futures based products to farmers in order to enable
them to hedge their price risk. To enable banks to offer such products, the Group
has recommended that banks may be permitted to have proprietary positions in
agricultural commodities within certain prudential limits.  Therefore, it has
recommended that the Central Government may issue a Notification under
clause (o) of sub-section (1) of Section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for
permitting banks to deal in the business of agricultural commodities including
derivatives. It has also been recommended that the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 should be amended and Forward Markets Commission
(FMC) should evolve a framework for introducing Options trading in agricultural
commodities in India.  The Group has suggested that banks may be permitted to
offer non-standard contracts as well as derivative based products to farmers so
as to help them to hedge their commodity price risk.  The Group has referred to
the efforts being made towards drafting suitable legislation to make Warehouse
Receipts negotiable. With a view to making Warehouse Receipts freely
transferable pending suitable legislation and to create a physical infrastructure it
has recommended creation of an umbrella structure to act as a Closed User
Group (CUG), the membership of which  may be extended to all players in the
commodity market.
The report of the Group is available on the Reserve Bank of India’s
website (www.rbi.org.in). Views may please be sent to psaran@rbi.org.in or may
be faxed to 022-22660970 by May 31, 2005.
          Alpana Killawala
     Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1183