PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 26, 2005
ECB for NGOs engaged in micro finance activities
under Automatic Route
Shri P. Chidambaram, Finance Minister, Government of India, in his
speech announcing the Union Budget for 2005-2006 stated that “I propose to
request the Reserve Bank to open a window to enable qualified NGOs
engaged in micro finance activities to use External Commercial Borrowings
(ECB) window. Detailed guidelines containing necessary safeguards will be
issued by the Reserve Bank.”
Accordingly, it has been decided that NGOs engaged in micro finance
activities may be permitted to raise ECB up to USD 5 million during a financial
year for permitted end-use, under Automatic Route. Detailed guidelines on
ECB for micro finance activities with necessary safeguards are being issued.
NGOs engaged in micro finance activities having satisfactory borrowing
relationship of three years with a bank and ‘fit and proper’ board/management
committee would be eligible to avail ECB. The designated Authorised Dealer
(AD) must ensure that the ECB proceeds are utilised for lending to self-help
groups or for micro-credit or for bonafide micro finance activity including
capacity building.  ECB funds should be routed through normal banking
channel. ECB from following internationally recognised sources i.e. ( i)
international banks, (ii) multilateral financial institutions, (iii) export credit
agencies may be availed. Furthermore, overseas organisations and
individuals complying with Know Your Customer (KYC) guidelines and anti-
money laundering safeguards may lend ECB. The maximum foreign currency
borrowings of a borrower is USD 5 million during a financial year.
All other ECB parameters such as minimum average maturity, all-in-
cost ceilings, issuance of guarantee, choice of security, parking of ECB
proceeds, prepayment, refinancing of ECB and reporting arrangements under
the Automatic Route should be complied with. The designated AD has to
ensure at the time of draw down that the forex exposure of the borrower is
hedged.
P. V. Sadanandan
         Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1113