PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 21, 2005
Issue of Rs.500 denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series with
additional/new security features without inset letter in numbering panel bearing
the signature of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs.500 denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series without inset letter in numbering panel bearing the signature of
Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor. The new series 2005 banknotes will be of the same size and
there is no change in the design/images of the banknotes both at the obverse (front)
and reverse (back). While there is no change in the colour at the obverse (front), the
colour at the reverse (back) is  different due to use of only offset printing.
The salient security features (both additional/new and existing) of the Rs.500
banknotes are as under:
OBVERSE (front)
Security Thread: The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma
Gandhi's portrait. The new banknotes have a machine readable windowed demetalised
clear text magnetic 3 mm wide security thread with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and "RBI" with
colour shift from green to blue when viewed from different angles. It will fluoresce in
yellow on the reverse and the text will fluoresce on the obverse under UV light. The
thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when held up against light.
See-through Register: The floral design printed both on the obverse (front)  and
reverse (back) of the Rs.500 banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the
watermark window has been replaced by the denominational numeral 500. Half of the
numeral is printed on the obverse (front) and half on the reverse (back). Both the printed
portions have an accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one
when seen against light.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 500 appears alongside Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the
watermark window.
Omron-anti photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny
yellow circles on either side of the legend Reserve Bank of India. A banknote with this
feature, when copied by a colour photocopier, gives an output with a different colour
shade.
Optically Variable Ink: The numeral 500 in the middle of the banknotes is
printed in optically variable ink. The colour of the numeral changes from a particular
shade of green to blue when the banknote is tilted. The font (size) of the numeral is
slightly smaller.Latent Image: A vertical band on the right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait
contains a latent image showing the denominational numeral 500. The latent image is
visible only when the note is held horizontally at eye level.
Intaglio printing: The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal,
guarantee and promise clause, Ashoka pillar emblem on the left, RBI Governor's
signature and identification mark for the visually impaired are printed in intaglio, i.e., in
raised prints(felt by touch), and have been made more prominent by raising the intaglio
print.
REVERSE (back)
Year of printing: Year of printing appears at the bottom on the reverse of the
banknote.
Omron-anti photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny
yellow circles in the right hand margin of the banknote.
Variation in colour scheme: The overall colour scheme of the images and fine
lines is altered due to resorting to only offset printing. The earlier dark brown, light
brown and green are replaced with only dark and light brown. The overall look of the
banknotes is brownish. The language panel, ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¢£	¸ö¨¸Ä ¤¸ÿˆÅ , numeral 500 and the
design/motif at the top and bottom have a light brown shade instead of the dark brown-
green shade in the existing banknotes.
All the security features with illustrations are displayed on the RBI website
(www.rbi.org.in) .
All banknotes in the denomination of Rs.500 issued by the Bank after the year
1987 will continue to be legal tender.
                             G Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/493