RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 7, 2005
th
India RBI hosts 8 Meeting of
BIS Working Party on Monetary Policy in Asia
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) hosted the eighth meeting of the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) Working Party on Monetary Policy in Asia. The meeting was
held in Mumbai on June 6 and 7, 2005. The meeting of the BIS Working Party on Monetary
Policy in Asia was held for the first time in India. Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank
inaugurated the meeting and Mr. William R. White, Economic Adviser and Head of Monetary
and Economic Department, BIS chaired it. Senior executives from central banks of Australia,
Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore
and Thailand attended the meeting. In addition, representatives of the Bank of Canada, the
European Central Bank, the Banque de France, De Nederlandsche Bank, the US Federal
Reserve Board and other delegates from BIS participated in the meeting.
Welcoming the delegates, the Governor mentioned that countries benefit from each
other’s experience and perceptions despite their own unique characteristics. Over the period,
policy making is becoming more globalised as cyclical changes are becoming more
synchronised especially since the 1990s. There is increasing convergence in perception,
institutional structure, choice of instruments and communication strategy in monetary policy
making. He added that the central banks over time have to rely on the confidence channel
and often judgements are involved in managing perceptions.  Focussing on the country
specific features of India, he said that the multiple indicator approach followed by the Reserve
Bank is a logical outcome of the multiple objectives that characterise the monetary policy
framework. The enactment of Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act by the
Parliament provides further flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.  He also drew
attention to the data gaps in the conduct of monetary policy in India especially that on
employment.  However, over the years, India has built resilience to shocks and is less
vulnerable to output volatility, he said and added that the economy has largely been insulated
from episodes of global financial instability. Barring supply shocks, in particular those due to
the international oil prices, inflation, especially the core inflation has been fairly low.
The meeting focussed on current issues in monetary policy. These included growth
prospects for Asia, the role of the current IT cycle and its relevance to the Asian outlook,
possible indicators of overheating and the consequences of higher oil and non-oil commodity
prices. The discussions on foreign exchange reserves and exchange rate developments
included issues pertaining to monetary and exchange rate policies. The discussions on
inflation targeting centred on reasons for its limited adoption in Asia and whether the central
bank commitment to quantitative targets helps or hinders effective communication of
monetary policy intent.
The discussions were informal and facilitated exchange of views on key policy issues
at a senior level within a small group.
     Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1285