PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 28, 2005
RBI unveils Roadmap for Presence of Foreign Banks in India
And Guidelines on Ownership and Governance in Private Banks
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today released the roadmap for presence of
foreign banks in India and guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector
banks. Shri P Chidambaram, Minister of Finance, Government of India, in his speech
announcing the Union Budget for 2005-2006 today, stated that the “RBI has prepared a
roadmap for banking sector reforms and will unveil the same.”
Accordingly, the following three documents have been released:
(a) Roadmap for presence of foreign banks in India along with
(b) Annex for setting up of wholly owned banking subsidiaries and
(c) Guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks
Roadmap for Presence of Foreign Banks in India
It may be recalled that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of
India had, on March 5, 2004 revised the existing guidelines on foreign direct investment
(FDI) in the banking sector. These guidelines also included investment by non-resident
Indians (NRIs) and FIIs in the banking sector.
As per the guidelines the aggregate foreign investment from all sources was
allowed up to a maximum of 74 per cent of the paid up capital of the bank while the
resident Indian holding of the capital was to be at least 26 per cent. It was also provided
that foreign banks may operate in India through only one of the three channels, namely
(i) branch/es (ii) a Wholly owned Subsidiary or (iii) a subsidiary with an aggregate
foreign investment up to a maximum of 74 per cent in a private bank. In consultation
with the Government of India, RBI has released the road map for presence of foreign
banks in India to operationalise the guidelines.
The roadmap is divided into two phases. During the first phase, between March
2005 and March 2009, foreign banks will be permitted to establish presence by way of
1setting up a wholly owned banking subsidiary (WOS) or conversion of the existing
branches into a WOS.
To facilitate this, RBI has also issued detailed guidelines. The guidelines cover,
inter alia, the eligibility criteria of the applicant foreign banks such as ownership pattern,
financial soundness, supervisory rating and the international ranking. The WOS will
have a minimum capital requirement of Rs. 300 crore, i.e., Rs 3 billion and would need
to ensure sound corporate governance. The WOS will be treated on par with the
existing branches of foreign banks for branch expansion with flexibility to go beyond the
existing WTO commitments of 12 branches in a year and preference for branch
expansion in under-banked areas. The Reserve Bank may also prescribe market
access and national treatment limitation consistent with WTO as also other appropriate
limitations to the operations of WOS, consistent with international practices and the
country’s requirements.
During this phase, permission for acquisition of share holding in Indian private
sector banks by eligible foreign banks will be limited to banks identified by RBI for
restructuring. RBI may if it is satisfied that such investment by the foreign bank
concerned will be in the long term interest of all the stakeholders in the investee bank,
permit such acquisition. Where such acquisition is by a foreign bank having presence in
India, a maximum period of six months will be given for conforming to the ‘one form of
presence’ concept.
The second phase will commence in April 2009 after a review of the experience
gained and after due consultation with all the stakeholders in the banking sector. The
review would examine issues concerning extension of national treatment to WOS,
dilution of stake and permitting mergers/acquisitions of any private sector banks in India
by a foreign bank in the second phase.
Guidelines on Ownership and Governance
For Private Banks
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank had released a draft policy framework
for ownership and governance in private sector banks on July 2, 2004 for discussion
and feed back. These guidelines emphasised desirability of diversified ownership in
banks, ‘fit and proper’ status of important shareholders, directors and the CEO and the
need for a minimum capital / net worth criteria. Suitable transition arrangements had
been provided while keeping the policy and the processes transparent and fair. The
guidelines have remained in the public domain for a sufficient length of time and have
been widely debated. There is a general consensus on the need for good governance
and management in the banking system and desirability of diversified ownership to the
extent possible while keeping the overriding objective of ensuring fit and proper status
of owners and directors. Certain issues were also raised on the application of the
framework to existing banks and the need for enabling shareholding higher than 10 per
cent to facilitate restructuring in the banking system and consolidation.
2Based on the feedback received and in consultation with the Government of
India, the Reserve bank has now finalized the guidelines on ownership and governance.
The guidelines provide for higher levels of shareholding, inter alia, for ensuring
restructuring and consolidation simultaneous with compliance of fit and proper criteria.
The present policy of acknowledgement for acquisition / transfer of shares by FIIs will
continue based upon the guidelines on acknowledgement of acquisition / transfer of
shares issued on February 3, 2004 and RBI may seek certification from the concerned
FII of all beneficial interest.
While implementing the above policies it will be ensured by RBI that the
approach is consultative, processes are transparent and fair, and a non-disruptive path
is followed.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-05/910
3