PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 30, 2005
Reserve Bank proposes changes in Banking Ombudsman
Scheme to include customer complaints relating to credit cards
The Reserve Bank has today released a draft Banking Ombudsman Scheme
2002 (as amended upto June 2005) for public comments.  The Reserve Bank has
proposed to amend the Banking Ombudsman Scheme to widen its scope to reflect
the present needs of the bank customers.  With this in view, it has proposed to cover
under the Banking Ombudsman Scheme the customer complaints relating to banks'
credit card operations even when they are offered by their subsidiaries.
The proposed amendments also envisage appointment of nodal officers at
regional/zonal offices of the banks for coordination between the bank and the
Banking Ombudsman
The amendments to the Banking Ombudsman Scheme propose to include in
the purview of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, customer complaints, such as,
delays in rendering customer service in payment or non-payment of inward
remittances/execution of request for remittances, delays in issuing of demand
drafts/pay orders/banker's cheques, delays in providing the facility promised in
writing including those promised by direct selling agents, excluding the same related
to loans and advances, levying charges without prior notice to the customer,
disputes relating to levy of service charges and interest on dues and overdues in the
operation of credit/debit cards, disputes relating to operations of ATM and ATM
cards.
The amendments also propose to include other services rendered by banks,
such as, non-acceptance of coins done without sufficient cause, delays arising at
bank level in non-disbursement of pension, refusal or delay in accepting tax
payments redemption of government bonds, forced closure of deposit account
without due notice and sufficient reason and even non-adherence to the fair practice
code as adopted by individual banks.  The proposed amendments also provide for
the customer to make a complaint in any other form than the one prescribed under
the scheme.  The earlier scheme required the customer to make a complaint in the
prescribed format only.
The Reserve Bank had, in 2002, formulated the Banking Ombudsman
Scheme to provide easy and inexpensive way for resolving disputes between the
bank and its customer.
The amendments proposed will enable the Banking Ombudsman to deal with
any complaint that the bank customer may have with regard to deficiency in banks2
services, excepting those relating to provision of loan or credit by the banks wherein
the commercial judgement of the banks is involved.
The Banking Ombudsman is a quasi judiciary authority with powers to
resolve disputes between the bank and its customers through the process of
conciliation or mediation or by issuance of an award as well as to resolve disputes
between two banks by arbitration. The Banking Ombudsmen are appointed by the
Reserve Bank of India. There are 15 Banking Ombudsman Offices covering the
entire country and once the Banking Ombudsman gives the award and the
complainant  within a period of 15 days accepts the award in full and final settlement
of his claim, the award will be binding on the bank against which it is issued unless it
prefers to file for review of the award to the Review Authority resting with the
Reserve Bank.
In the cases where the bank does not file for such review, the bank has to
accept the award and intimate the compliance to the Banking Ombudsman within
one month. In the event of the bank failing to implement the Award within the
prescribed time limit, the complainant may also, if he so desires, approach the
Review Authority with a prayer to pass an appropriate direction to the bank for
immediate compliance of the Award.
In cases where the bank files a review application against the award and the
Review Authority, however, upholds the award, the bank shall implement the same
within a period of one month. On failure on the part of the bank to do so, the Reserve
Bank may consider suitable steps to implement the decision of the Review Authority.
The draft Banking Ombudsman Scheme is available on the Reserve Bank of
India`s website (www.rbi.org.in). Views on the amendments, which have been given
in bold, may please be sent to cgmincrpcd@rbi.org.in or gsrinivasan@rbi.org.in or
may be faxed to 022-22658276/022-22658273 by July 16,2005.
P.V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1388