PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
RBI  on Internet: http://www.rbi.org.in
       e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
Phone: 266 05 02 Fax: 266 03 58,  270 3279
May 11, 2005
RBI's Rajbhasha Shield distribution Function held
To enhance the level of their customer service, the banks need  to reach
banking information to the common people in their own language. Since Hindi is
well accepted, understood and spoken in most of the states, banks can
effectively use it to reach banking to the common people. Dr. Y. V. Reddy,
Governor, Reserve Bank of India said this while giving away the Rajbhasha
Shields for the year 2003-04 to the banks and financial institutions. The function
was held in the Reserve Bank of India, Central Office Auditorium today. He also
gave away awards for the best house-journals and for Inter Bank Hindi Essay
Competitions.
The annual Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield was instituted in 1980 to
encourage public sector banks to use Hindi in their day-to-day working. Along
with the scheme, the Reserve Bank also conducts a competition for the house
journals of banks and financial institutions. The Reserve Bank has also initiated
an Inter Bank Hindi Essay Competition from 2002-03.
Shri V. Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank, while
complementing the winner banks and financial institutions, noted, "There is a
need to maximise the use of Hindi in the banks as they are connected to the
people." He stressed, "that the Government's developmental schemes must
reach each and every individual. To achieve this target, if the information of
such schemes is given in the language of the masses, it will help the banks,
particularly in the rural areas to implement them with better results. Although the
banks have made a significant progress in this regard, they still have a long way
to go.  Hindi and other Indian languages can play a pivotal role in this regard."
Earlier, Shri A. V. Sardesai, Executive Director welcomed the Chief
Executives of banks and financial institutions. Shri Bazil Shaikh, Chief General
Manager, Human Resources Development Department, Reserve Bank of India,
proposed a vote of thanks. Shri R. D. Dhurve, Officer-in-charge, Rajbhasha
Department of the Reserve Bank of India conducted the programme.
The function was attended by the chairmen and other senior executives
of the banks and financial institutions. The results are enclosed.
    Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1180