`
PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 25, 2005
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Annual Policy Statement for the year 2005-06
Highlights
Domestic Developments
• Based on the current assessment of a pick-up in agricultural output and in the
momentum in other sectors, GDP growth projection for 2005-06 revised to 7.0-7.5
per cent from the earlier projection of around 7.0 per cent. 
• Annual inflation, as measured by point-to-point variations in wholesale price
index, receded from 6.0 per cent in April 2005 to 4.6 per cent in October 2005.
• Inflation in the range of 5.0-5.5 per cent as projected. Forward looking policy
response is necessary to realise growth momentum and potential for higher growth
without adding to inflation expectations.
• Money supply (M ) may turn out to be somewhat higher than the earlier
3
projection of 14.5 per cent for the full year. Aggregate deposit growth also expected
to be higher than earlier projection.
• Year-on-year adjusted non-food credit is expected to increase significantly
higher than 19.0 per cent projected earlier.
• Financial markets have remained stable and orderly, although interest rates
have firmed up in almost all segments. The yield curve has steepened. Significant
increase in CBLO volumes.
• Total liquidity sterilised in the form of MSS, LAF and surplus balances of
Central Government increased from an average of about Rs.1,14,192 crore in March
2005 to Rs.1,20,076 crore in October 2005.
• The market borrowing programme of the Central Government has so far
remained consistent with the projections set out in the Union Budget for 2005-06.External Developments
• Exports in US dollar terms in the first half of 2005-06 increased by 20.5 per
cent compared with 30.8 per cent in the corresponding period in the previous year.
Imports rose by 33.1 per cent as against an increase of 37.3 per cent in the
corresponding period last year. Hardening of international crude oil prices and import
demand emanating from a pick-up in domestic industrial activity contributed to the
import growth observed.
• Foreign exchange reserves stood at US$ 143.4 billion as on October 14,
2005, increasing from US$ 141.5 billion as at end-March 2005.
• Evolving developments in the balance of payments warrant careful monitoring
in view of oil prices and continued strong investment demand.
• Foreign exchange market witnessed orderly conditions in the first half of
2005-06. The exchange rate of the rupee depreciated by 3.0 per cent to US dollar by
October 21, 2005, from Rs.43.75 per US dollar at end-March 2005 to Rs.45.09 per
US dollar. However, it appreciated by 4.2 per cent against the Euro, by 2.5 per cent
against the Pound sterling and by 4.5 per cent against the Japanese yen during the
period
Global Developments
• Global economic activity remained robust but slackened moderately in the
second quarter of 2005; Likely growth of 4.3 per cent in 2005 from 5.1 per cent in
2004.
• Rise in oil prices has triggered inflationary pressures globally, remaining the
single largest risk to the global economy.
• Risks to global growth also emanate from the persisting macroeconomic
imbalances and the resulting abundance of global liquidity, asset bubbles, excessive
leveraging in financial markets.
Overall Assessment
• On balance, macroeconomic and financial conditions have evolved as
anticipated. Overall industrial growth has strengthened, monsoon fears have eased,
non-food credit growth has been buoyant, the demand for government securities has
been sustained and a pick-up in investment demand is evident.
• Some downward risks to the economic outlook have emerged in the recent
months. Ensuring credit quality and increasing the pace of investment in
infrastructure is important. Asset prices have registered a substantial increase. The
overall positive sentiment, the business confidence of the private sector and the
strength as well as resilience of the domestic economy would continue to determine
capital flows.Stance of Monetary Policy
• The Reserve Bank will continue to ensure that appropriate liquidity is
maintained in the system so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met,
consistent with the objective of price stability. Towards this end, RBI will continue
with its policy of active demand management of liquidity through open market
operations including MSS, LAF and CRR, and using all the policy instruments at its
disposal flexibly, as and when the situation warrants.
• Barring the emergence of any adverse and unexpected developments in
various sectors of the economy and keeping in view the current assessment of the
economy including the outlook for inflation, the overall stance of monetary policy for
the remaining part of the year will be: (i) Consistent with emphasis on price stability,
provision of appropriate liquidity to meet genuine credit needs and support export
and investment demand in the economy. (ii) Ensuring an interest rate environment
that is conducive to macroeconomic and price stability, and maintaining the growth
momentum. (iii) To consider measures in a calibrated and prompt manner, in
response to evolving circumstances with a view to stabilising inflationary
expectations.
Monetary Measures
• Bank Rate kept unchanged at 6.0 per cent.
• Reverse Repo Rate increased by 25 basis points to 5.25 per cent, effective
October 26, 2005. The spread between reverse repo rate and the repo rate under
LAF maintained at 100 basis points.
• The cash reserve ratio (CRR) kept unchanged at 5.0 per cent.
Developmental and Regulatory Policies
Interest Rate Policy
• Indian Banks’ Association being asked to review the benchmark prime lending
rate (BPLR) system and issue transparent guidelines for appropriate pricing of credit.
Financial Markets
• The Reserve Bank has constituted a new department named as Financial
Markets Department (FMD) in July 2005 with a view to moving towards functional
separation between debt management and monetary operations.
• Intra-day short selling in government securities proposed to be introduced.
• NDS-OM module to be extended to all insurance entities which are mandated
to invest in government securities.
• Screen-based negotiated quote-driven system for call/notice and term money
markets and electronic trading platform for market repo operations in government
securities are being developed by Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL).
External Commercial Borrowings
• Special purpose vehicles (SPVs) or any other entity, notified by the Reserve
Bank, which are set up to finance infrastructure companies/projects would be treated
as financial institutions and ECBs raised by such entities would be considered under
the approval route.• Banks to be allowed to issue guarantees or standby letters of credit in respect
of ECBs raised by textile companies for modernistation or expansion of textile units.
Credit Delivery Mechanisms
• Banks advised to fix their own targets for financing the SME sector so as to
reflect higher disbursement; banks to formulate liberal and comprehensive policies
for extending loans to the SME sector and rationalise the cost of loans to this sector
with cost linked to credit ratings.
• A debt restructuring mechanism for units in the SME sector, in line with the
corporate debt restructuring (CDR) mechanism prevailing in the banking sector, has
been formulated by the Reserve Bank.  The performance of the CDR mechanism
was reviewed and the changes to the existing CDR scheme have been finalised.
• The Micro Finance Development Fund (MFDF) set up in the NABARD re-
designated as the Microfinance Development and Equity Fund (MFDEF) and its
corpus increased from Rs.100 crore to Rs.200 crore.  The modalities in regard to the
functioning of the MFDEF are being worked out.
• Internal Working Group proposed to examine the whole gamut of issues and
suggest suitable revisions to guidelines in regard to relief measures to be provided in
areas affected by natural calamities.
Financial Inclusion
• Measures proposed on credit delivery mechanisms with a view to ensuring
financial inclusion of all segments of the population, in both rural and urban areas, a
comprehensive framework to revive the co-operative credit system, revitalise the
regional rural banks (RRBs) and reorient commercial banking towards the credit-
disadvantaged sections of society.
• With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion all banks need to make
available a basic banking `no frills' account either with `nil' or very low minimum
balances as well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast
sections of population. All banks are urged to give wide publicity to the facility of
such a `no-frills' account so as to ensure greater financial inclusion.
Prudential Measures
• Bank's aggregate capital market exposure restricted to 40 per cent of the net
worth of the bank on a solo and consolidated basis; consolidated direct capital
market exposure modified to 20 per cent of the bank's consolidated net worth. Banks
having sound internal controls and robust risk management systems can approach
the Reserve Bank for higher limits.
• General provisioning requirement for 'standard advances' increased from the
present level of 0.25 per cent to 0.40 per cent; direct advances to agricultural and
SME sectors exempted from the additional provisioning requirement.
• Supervisory review process to be initiated with select banks having significant
exposure to some sectors, namely, real estate, highly leveraged NBFCs, venture
capital funds and capital markets, in order to ensure that effective risk mitigants and
sound internal controls are in place.
• General permission to banks to issue debit cards in tie-up with non-bank
entities.Institutional Developments
• By end-March 2006, 15,000 branches are proposed to be covered by RTGS
connectivity, and the number of monthly transactions of the system is expected to
expand from one lakh to two lakh.
• The National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) system would be
implemented in phases for all networked branches of banks all over the country.
• The pilot project for Cheque Truncation System is expected to be
implemented in New Delhi by end-March 2006.
• National settlement system (NSS) to enable banks to manage liquidity in an
efficient and cost effective manner to be introduced in the four metropolitan centres
by end-December 2005.
• New company for retail payment systems proposed to be set up under
Section 25 of Companies Act; to be owned and operated by banks and likely to get
operational from April 1, 2006.
• Banks urged to test their business continuity plans periodically.
• Currency chest facility and licence to conduct foreign exchange business
(authorised person licence) to scheduled UCBs registered under the Multi-State Co-
operative Societies Act and under the State Acts where the State Governments
concerned have assured regulatory coordination by entering into MoU with the
Reserve Bank.
• Acquirer UCB to be permitted to amortise the losses taken over from the
acquired UCB over a period of not more than five years, including the year of
merger.
• Details of the scheme regarding implementation of the provisions of the Right
to Information Act, 2005 have been placed on the Reserve Bank's website.
• The Reserve Bank has recently updated its nominal effective exchange rates
(NEER) and real effective exchange rates (REER) indices. The new 6-currency
indices and the revised 36-country indices of NEER and REER would be published
in the the Reserve Bank of India Bulletin of December 2005.
The Third Quarter Review of Part I of the annual policy to be undertaken on
January 24, 2006.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General managerOctober 25, 2005
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Annual Policy Statement for the year 2005-06
Dr. Y. Venugopal Reddy, Governor, in a meeting with Chief Executives of
major commercial banks today presented the mid-term Review of the annual policy
Statement for 2005-06. The Statement consists of two parts: Part I. Review of
Annual Statement on Monetary Policy for the Year 2005-06; and Part II. Review of
Annual Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies for the Year 2005-06.
An analytical review of macroeconomic and monetary developments was issued, a
day in advance, as a supplement to Part I of the Statement providing the necessary
information and technical analysis with the help of simple charts and tables.
Domestic Developments
GDP Growth in 2005-06
Based on the current assessment of a pick-up in agricultural output and in the
momentum in industrial and services sectors, Governor placed the GDP growth in
2005-06 in the range of 7.0-7.5 per cent as against around 7.0 per cent as projected
earlier. He added that the kharif output may register an increase over the previous
year’s level. In addition, the improvement in water storage levels over the previous
year augurs well for the outlook on rabi production. Prospects for sustained growth in
industrial output have improved in an environment of rising investment and export
demand, strong corporate profitability and buoyant business confidence.
Inflation Rate
Inflation, as measured by variations in the wholesale price index (WPI), on a point-to-
point basis, receded from 6.0 per cent in April 2005 to 4.6 per cent by October 8,
2005 despite upward adjustments in the administered prices of petrol, diesel and
electricity and increase in the prices of aviation turbine fuel, naphtha, furnace oil and
iron and steel. On an average basis, annual inflation based on the WPI was 5.3 per
cent as on October 8, 2005 as compared with 6.2 per cent a year ago. Governor said
that the commitment to price stability has earned some success during the year so
far. Given the outlook for inflation primarily in the context of the oil economy in India,
however, it may be difficult to contain the inflation in the range of 5.0-5.5 per cent
projected earlier without an appropriate policy response. It is also necessary to
recognise and formulate a forward looking policy response in a manner that the
growth momentum and the potential for higher growth is realised without adding to
inflation expectations.
Monetary and Credit Indicators
Assessing the growth in monetary and credit aggregates, Governor said that money
supply (M ) has increased by 9.6 per cent in the first half and may turn out to be
3
somewhat higher than the earlier projection of 14.5 per cent for the full year.
Aggregate deposit growth is also expected to be higher than Rs.2,60,000 crore
projected earlier. Non-food bank credit including investments in
bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private corporate sector,
commercial paper (CP) etc., is expected to increase significantly, higher than 19.0per cent projected earlier. Year-on-year adjusted non-food credit (including non-SLR
investments) growth is at 27.8 per cent in the first half as compared with 21.4 per
cent a year ago and is expected to increase significantly higher than 19.0 per cent
projected earlier. Non-food credit has witnessed a structural shift towards the non-
agriculture non-industrial sectors in recent years. However, credit off-take has been
broad-based this year. Growth in non-agricultural non-industrial sector is led by
housing, real estate and personal loans. Scheduled commercial banks’ investments
in bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private corporate
sector, commercial paper (CP), etc., declined by 11.7 per cent in the first half as
compared with a decline of 3.9 per cent in the corresponding period last year.
Fiscal Position and Government Borrowings
The revenue deficit and gross fiscal deficit (GFD) of the Central Government during
April-August, 2005 accounted for about 78.0 per cent and 57.1 per cent of the
budget estimates for 2005-06, as compared with 82.6 per cent and 38.2 per cent,
respectively, in the corresponding period of the preceding year. The market
borrowing programme of the Centre and States envisaged for 2005-06 is higher than
in the previous year.
Governor mentioned that the market borrowing programme of the Central
Government has so far remained consistent with the projections set out in the Union
Budget. Underlying liquidity conditions and shifts in banks' portfolio preferences in
favour of credit has, however, entailed some hardening of yields. Continued large
borrowings from the market by the Centre and the States pose concerns for the
efficient conduct of debt management as well as for monetary operations. Regarding
market borrowing of the States, with the phasing out of Central Plan Loans to the
States, higher devolution of taxes and grants from the Centre to the States and
larger receipts from the national small saving fund (NSSF), States' market
borrowings is not likely to be out of alignment with the net allocation for 2005-06.
Scheduled commercial banks’ investment in government and other approved
securities at Rs.14,283 crore in the first half of 2005-06 was lower than that of Rs.
28,526 crore in the first half of the previous year, partly on account of the pick-up in
credit demand. A substantial support for the market borrowing programme has been
coming from non-bank entities.
Liquidity Scenario
During 2005-06 up to October 14, 2005 additional liquidity of Rs.4,065 crore was
absorbed under the MSS. Notwithstanding the MSS operations, surplus liquidity
conditions resulted in the reverse repo volumes tendered under the LAF increasing
from an average of Rs.29,809 crore in March to Rs.34,832 crore in August before
declining to Rs.21,128 crore in October. Governor noted that up to July, the
absorption of liquidity through the MSS was more than offset by decreasing reverse
repo levels. Thereafter, LAF reverse repo increased sharply as liquidity conditions
eased with the resumption of inflows from abroad. Total liquidity that remained
sterilised (in the form of MSS, LAF and surplus balances of Central Government)
increased from an average of about Rs.1,14,192 crore in March to Rs.1,23,844 crore
in August before declining to Rs.1,20,076 crore in October 2005.Financial Markets and Interest Rates
Financial markets have remained stable and orderly, although interest rates have
firmed up in almost all segments. The average call money rate increased from 4.77
per cent in April to 5.06 per cent in October 2005 while it generally remained closely
aligned with the LAF reverse repo rate. Treasury Bill rates increased. With a
relatively higher increase in the long-term yields, there was a steepening of the yield
curve. The average market repo rate increased from 4.63 per cent to 4.85 per cent,
while the average collateralised borrowing and lending obligation (CBLO) rate
increased from 4.58 per cent to 4.80 per cent.  The average daily volume of CBLO
increased significantly from Rs.5,185 crore to Rs.8,572 crore. Public sector banks
kept their rates for deposits of over one year unchanged in the range of 5.25-6.50
per cent during April-September 2005. The benchmark prime lending rates (BPLRs)
of public sector banks, private sector banks and foreign banks also remained
unchanged in the first half of 2005. Equity market activity recorded a pick-up in terms
of issuances. The BSE Sensex recovered from weak sentiment in April and rallied
with intermittent corrections in the successive months and rose to a new peak of
8800 on October 4, 2005 after which it registered some decline.
External Developments
Exports, Imports and Trade Balance
Exports during the first half of 2005-06 increased by 20.5 per cent in US dollar terms
as compared with 30.8 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year.
India’s merchandise export growth surpassed that of most Asian countries during
this period. Imports rose by 33.1 per cent as against an increase of 37.3 per cent in
the corresponding period last year. The overall trade deficit during the first half
widened to US $ 20.3 billion from US $ 11.9 billion a year ago, reflecting the
hardening of international crude oil prices and more significantly, import demand
emanating from a pick-up in domestic industrial activity.
Balance of Payments
During 2004-05, the current account recorded a deficit of US $ 6.4 billion after
remaining in surplus over the preceding three years beginning in 2001-02. The
turnaround to current account balance deficit has entailed step-up in recourse to
debt flows and a distinct moderation in the accretion to the reserves. Foreign
exchange reserves at US$ 143.4 billion as on October 14, 2005 with net accretion of
US$1.9 billion since April. There are significant shifts within balance of payments
which have implications for the conduct of monetary policy. Import to GDP ratio
having risen to 17.2 per cent in 2004-05, after hovering around 13.0 per cent during
previous five years, the trade deficit is emerging as the key determinant of India’s
balance of payments.
Governor explained that a key factor underlying the phenomenon of current account
balances has been the buoyancy in net invisible earnings which has been sustained
in the current financial year so far. Remittances from Indians employed abroad at 3.3
per cent of GDP seem to be of a significantly permanent nature. It is in this context
that the current level of the trade deficit and the current account deficit appear to be
manageable through normal capital flows. However, in view of the oil prices rise and
continued strong investment demand, the evolving developments in the balance of
payments warrant careful and continuous monitoring. He added that the substitution
of debt by non-debt flows in preceding years gives room for manoeuvre since debtlevels, particularly external commercial borrowings, have been moderate. The
emphasis would continue to be on encouraging inflows through foreign direct
investment and enhancement of the quality of portfolio flows.
Foreign Exchange Market
The Indian foreign exchange market has generally witnessed orderly conditions
during the current financial year so far. The exchange rate of the rupee, which was
Rs.43.75 per US dollar at end-March, 2005 depreciated by 3.0 per cent to Rs.45.09
per US dollar by October 21, 2005. However, it appreciated by 4.2 per cent against
the Euro, by 2.5 per cent against the Pound sterling and by 4.5 per cent against the
Japanese yen during the period.
The payment obligation on account of the redemption of India Millennium Deposits
(IMDs) of about US $ 7.1 billion is due in December 2005.  The Reserve Bank is
closely coordinating with the State Bank of India (SBI) and other involved banks and
it would be ensured that the discharge of liabilities would be without any adverse
impact on Indian financial market.
Global Developments
Global Growth
Global economic activity has slackened in the second quarter of 2005, stalled by
weak growth in the Euro area and Japan though domestic demand was sustained in
the US. Growth has been robust in several developing countries, including those in
Asia, led by China and India, Latin America, the Middle East and Russia. Global
output growth to slow down moderately to 4.3 per cent in 2005 from 5.1 per cent in
2004.
Global Inflation
Rise in oil prices has triggered fears of generalised inflationary pressures globally.
Consumer price inflation up in most advanced economies in the third quarter of
2005. Inflation has also risen in major emerging market economies, excluding China
and in other developing countries. Oil price remain the single largest risk to the
global economy exacerbated by the continued increase in global demand,
geopolitical uncertainties, strong refining demand and a series of supply disruptions.
It has a large permanent component which needs to be eventually passed to the
consumers in medium-term but could lead to significant increase in domestic inflation
and higher interest rates in the short-term.
Risks to Growth
Risks to global growth also emanate from the persisting macroeconomic imbalances
and the resulting abundance of global liquidity which carries the potential of fuelling
asset bubbles, excessive leveraging in financial markets and threats to global
financial stability. The current configuration of good growth, low inflation, abundant
liquidity, flat yield curves, lowering of credit risk premia and ever-expanding search
for yields has benefited many emerging market economies. On the downside, the
same combination of factors has allowed the macro imbalances to widen and has
resulted in a build-up of debt, especially by the household sector. These factors have
imparted an apparent stability to the financial system while sowing seeds of potential
disequilibrium that might require a larger adjustment at a later stage. Monetary policy
has also been tightened in several economies in emerging Asia, primarily inresponse to higher fuel prices. The indications in policy debates are towards either
tightening or withdrawal of the accommodative stance.
Stance of Monetary Policy for the Second Half of 2005-06
Governor mentioned that the conduct of monetary policy during the first half of 2005-
06 has been broadly in accordance with the stated stance. On balance,
macroeconomic and financial conditions have evolved as anticipated.  Overall
industrial growth has strengthened, monsoon fears have eased, non-food credit
growth has been buoyant, broad-based and supportive of the acceleration in
industrial activity. However, the rising shares of housing and real estate in particular
has warranted precautionary policy action to ensure credit quality. The demand for
government securities from insurance companies and other non-bank financial
institutions has been sustained. A pick-up in investment demand is evident and the
business climate has improved considerably. Monetary conditions have evolved in
an orderly manner. Liquidity mismatches have also been met in an orderly manner
with the flexibility available, particularly under the LAF mechanism and operation of
MSS. The pass-through of the escalation in international crude prices has been
managed well and timed into the ebbing phase of inflation.  Accordingly, the
inflationary outcome has so far turned out to be consistent with initial projections and
inflationary expectations are stable. Financial markets have remained stable and
supportive of growth. Widening of the trade deficit has automatically absorbed the
capital flows and economised on monetary policy action to sterilise these flows.
Current account deficit remains within manageable limits, supported by rising
international competitiveness of India's invisible exports and remittances from
Indians working overseas.
However, several factors posing a downward risk to the outlook on growth and
inflation have emerged in the recent months. Non-food credit expansion has been
high. Despite high non-food credit growth, the share of credit to infrastructure
remains low relative to the size and state of the economy. Inflation is low in terms of
commodity prices but asset prices, especially housing prices, have registered a
substantial increase. Asset price changes continue to pose a challenge for monetary
policy as it can have a powerful effect on investment and/or consumption through a
financial accelerator effect. Global crude oil prices continue to be high and volatile
and an overwhelming part of the increase in recent years is now increasingly being
regarded as permanent. Trade and current account deficit has been widening but the
invisible surplus and capital inflows have ensured a comfortable balance of
payments situation. International interest rates cycles had so far shown mixed
behaviour but currently the general indications are that the accommodative stance is
being withdrawn and, in some cases, may be tightened. This has implications for
capital flows. Governor cautioned that these factors warrant close monitoring for
sustaining the growth process with a tolerable level of inflation.
Upside inflationary pressures from oil prices can be expected to continue with
attendant direct and indirect effects. So far, there has been only partial pass-through
of international crude prices into domestic prices of petroleum products and second
round effects have not yet become noticeably significant. At this stage, therefore, it is
necessary to contain inflationary expectations in response to the evolving oil
scenario and continue to take measures in a forward looking manner. It is necessaryto be in readiness to take further measures as warranted to meet the challenges
posed by the evolving situation, given the unfolding of the risks.
The Reserve Bank will continue to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained in
the system so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met, consistent with the
objective of price stability. Towards this end, RBI will continue with its policy of active
demand management of liquidity through OMO including MSS, LAF and CRR, and
using all the policy instruments at its disposal flexibly, as and when the situation
warrants.
In sum, barring the emergence of any adverse and unexpected developments in
various sectors of the economy and keeping in view the current assessment of the
economy including the outlook for inflation, the overall stance of monetary policy for
the remaining part of the year will be:
• Consistent with emphasis on price stability, provision of appropriate liquidity to
meet genuine credit needs and support export and investment demand in the
economy.
• Ensuring an interest rate environment that is conducive to macroeconomic
and price stability, and maintaining the growth momentum.
• To consider measures in a calibrated and prompt manner, in response to
evolving circumstances with a view to stabilising inflationary expectations.
Monetary Measures
(a) Bank Rate
On a review of macroeconomic development, bank Rate kept unchanged at 6.0 per
cent.
(b) Reverse Repo Rate
In view of the current macroeconomic and overall monetary conditions, it has been
decided to increase the fixed reverse repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility
by 25 basis points with effect from October 26,2005 to 5.25 per cent. The repo rate
will continue to be linked to the reverse repo rate.  The spread between the reverse
repo rate and the repo rate has been retained at 100 basis points, as at present.
Accordingly, the fixed repo rate under LAF will be 6.25 per cent, effective October
26, 2005.
(c) Cash Reserve Ratio
The cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks is currently at 5.0 per cent.  While
the Reserve Bank continues to pursue its medium-term objective of reducing the
CRR to the statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent, on a review of the current
liquidity situation, it is felt desirable to keep the present level of CRR at 5.0 per cent
unchanged.
Developmental and Regulatory Policies
Governor stated that the annual policy Statements as well as mid-term Reviews of
the Reserve Bank have progressively sharpened the focus on developmental and
regulatory policies to strengthen the financial system, with a view to ensuring
financial stability as a prerequisite for high and stable growth. The Reserve Bank's
approach has been to reorient its role in the context of the evolving conditions for
improving institutional soundness, strengthening the regulatory and supervisory
processes and developing the necessary legal and technological infrastructure. In
this context, the Reserve Bank is continually broadening its consultative and
participative process for wider involvement of all stakeholders in the financial systemwith a view to encouraging a more informed evaluation of the underlying content and
quality of policies.
On the development and regulatory policies in this mid-term Review, the focus is one
enhancing delivery of appropriate credit at a reasonable price, developing financial
markets and enhancing the integration of various segments of the financial markets
with proper checks and balances. Within the emphasis assigned to credit delivery to
agriculture and the small and medium enterprise (SME) sector, developing a
conducive environment for micro-finance institutions (MFIs) to cover financial
services in addition to credit requires specific attention. With a view to ensuring
financial inclusion of all segments of the population, in both rural and urban areas, a
comprehensive framework to revive the co-operative credit system, revitalise the
regional rural banks (RRBs) and reorient commercial banking towards the credit-
disadvantaged sections of society assumes high priority.
Interest Rate Policy
On further deregulation of interest rates, Reserve Bank constituted an Internal
Working Group on NRI Deposits which submitted its report in September 2005.
Furthermore, the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) has been requested to constitute
technical groups for preparation of discussion papers on review and deregulation of
interest rate on savings bank deposits and lending rates on small loans up to Rs.2
lakh.
Review of BPLR system
Indian Banks’ Association may, in consultation with its member banks, review the
benchmark prime lending rate (BPLR) system and issue transparent guidelines for
appropriate pricing of credit. Current system has not fully met expectations.
Competition has forced the pricing of significant portion of loans far out of alignment
with BPLRs and in non-transparent manner. There is a public perception that there is
under-pricing of credit for corporates while there could be over-pricing of lending to
agriculture and small and medium enterprises.  Therefore, a need has arisen to
review the current procedures and processes of pricing of credit through a well
structured and segment-wise analysis of costs at various stages of intermediation in
the whole credit cycle.
Financial Markets
Money Market
A screen-based negotiated quote-driven system for all dealings in call/notice and
term money market and an electronic trading platform for conduct of market repo
operations in government securities, in addition to the existing voice-based system,
are being developed by Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL).
Government Securities Market
As indicated earlier, in the post FRBM Act period, the Reserve Bank will reorient
government debt management operations while simultaneously strengthening
monetary operations in order to prepare for withdrawing from primary financing of the
Central Government's borrowing programme, effective April 2006. Accordingly, the
Reserve Bank has constituted a new department named as Financial Markets
Department (FMD) in July 2005 with a view to moving towards functional separation
between debt management and monetary operations. To begin with, the functions of
the FMD include OMO, LAF, MSS and standing liquidity facilities; regulation anddevelopment of money market instruments and monitoring of money, government
securities and foreign exchange markets. The functions of the FMD would also cover
the Reserve Bank's operations in the domestic foreign exchange market, in due
course, in order to achieve the desired integration with conduct of monetary
operations.
The recommendations of the Technical Group relating to restructuring the
underwriting obligations of primary dealers (PDs), allowing PDs exclusivity in primary
auctions, introduction of 'When Issued' market and limited short selling in
government securities were examined by the Reserve Bank in consultation with the
Government.  Accordingly, as a first step, it is proposed:
• to introduce intra-day short selling in government securities.  Guidelines in this
regard would be issued separately.
Operationalisation of Electronic Trading Platform
As indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2005, a screen-based order-
driven anonymous NDS Order Matching (NDS-OM) Module has been
operationalised in August 2005.  In the first phase, the NDS-OM module has been
introduced for RBI-regulated NDS members. It is now proposed:
• to extend NDS-OM module to all insurance entities which are mandated to
invest in government securities. Guidelines in this regard would be issued
separately.
Revision of WMA/Overdraft Scheme for State Governments: Status
Advisory Committee to Review the WMA Scheme constituted in April 2005
(Chairman: Shri M.P. Bezbaruah) is expected to submit its report shortly. The report
would then be discussed with the State Governments.
Foreign Exchange Market
The recommendations of the Internal Group on Forex Markets, particularly those on
writing of covered options by corporates, hedging of economic risk of corporates in
respect of their domestic operations arising out of changes in the landed cost of the
imported substitutes of the commodities they consume/produce and crystallisation of
overdue export bills, are under examination.
External Commercial Borrowings: Expansion
It is clarified that Special purpose vehicles (SPVs) or any other entity, notified by the
Reserve Bank, which are set up to finance infrastructure companies/projects would
be treated as financial institutions and ECBs raised by such entities would be
considered under the approval route.
With a view to facilitating capacity expansion and technological
upgradation in the Indian textile units after phasing out of the Multi-Fibre Agreement,
it is proposed:
• to allow banks to issue guarantees or standby letters of credit in respect of
ECBs raised by textile companies for modernisation or expansion of textile units.
Such applications would be considered under the approval route subject to
prudential norms.Credit Delivery Mechanisms
Flow of Credit to Agriculture
It has been the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to improve the agricultural credit
delivery mechanism to enable banks to provide adequate and timely finance at
reasonable rates. During 2004-05, disbursements to agriculture by public sector
banks under special agricultural credit plans (SACP) aggregated Rs.65,218 crore
against the projection of Rs.55,616 crore. By end-June 2005, public sector banks
had issued 183.5 lakh kisan credit cards (KCCs) with aggregate limits amounting to
Rs.62,000 crore. As announced in the Union Budget for 2005-06, Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) XI has been established with the NABARD
with a corpus of Rs.8,000 crore.  Cumulative sanctions and disbursements till August
2005, under various tranches of RIDF (I to XI) amounted to Rs.44,389 crore and
Rs.26,693 crore, respectively.
Priority Sector Lending
An Internal Working Group (Chairman: Shri C. S. Murthy) was set up by the Reserve
Bank to review the existing policy on priority sector lending including the segments
constituting the priority sector, targets and sub-targets and recommend changes as
necessary. The draft technical paper of the Group has been placed on the Reserve
Bank's website for wider dissemination and comments. The technical paper has also
been sent to the Government and the IBA for their views.
Credit Flow to Small and Medium Enterprises
As a sequel to the announcement made by the Hon'ble Finance Minister in the
Parliament on August 10, 2005 in regard to a policy package for stepping up credit to
small and medium enterprises, banks were advised to fix their own targets for
financing the SME sector so as to reflect a higher disbursement over the immediately
preceding year and to formulate liberal and comprehensive policies for extending
loans to the SME sector. Banks also asked to rationalise the cost of loans to this
sector with the cost transparently linked to the credit ratings. Units with investment in
plant and machinery in excess of the small scale industries (SSI) limit and up to
Rs.10 crore would be treated as medium enterprises (ME) and only SSI financing
would be included in priority sector lending. Banks should make concerted efforts to
provide credit cover to at least five new small/medium enterprises per year on an
average, at each of their semi-urban/urban branches. Banks should increasingly
adopt the cluster-based approach for financing the SME sector and ensure presence
of specialised SME branches in identified clusters/centres with preponderance of
medium enterprises to provide SME entrepreneurs easy access to bank credit and
also equip their personnel with requisite expertise.
The Reserve Bank has constituted empowered committees at its regional offices to
review the progress in SME financing and rehabilitation of sick SSI and ME units so
as to ensure smooth flow of credit to these sectors.  The Reserve Bank has also
formulated a one-time settlement scheme for recovery of non-performing assets
(NPAs) below Rs.10 crore for SME accounts and detailed guidelines have been
issued to public sector banks for implementation.  A debt restructuring mechanism
for units in the SME sector, in line with the corporate debt restructuring (CDR)
mechanism prevailing in the banking sector, has been formulated by the Reserve
Bank and guidelines were issued to banks for implementation.Restructuring and Development of Regional Rural Banks
As indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2005, an Internal Group
(Chairman: Shri A. V. Sardesai) was set up by the Reserve Bank to examine various
alternatives available within the existing legal framework for strengthening regional
rural banks (RRBs). The Group submitted its report in June 2005 which has been
sent to the Government for their comments. The major recommendations of the
Group include merger/amalgamation of RRBs to improve operational viability,
change of sponsor banks to enhance competitiveness, strengthening of balance
sheets in respect of merged entities, regulatory and supervisory strengthening,
governance and management and scope for improving profitability.
Micro-finance
The programme of linking self-help groups (SHGs) with the banking system
continues to be the major micro-finance programme in the country and is being
implemented by commercial banks, RRBs and co-operative banks.  By end-July
2005, as many as 16,53,047 SHGs were linked to banks and the total flow of credit
to SHGs was Rs.7,063 crore.
The following measures have been initiated to give further impetus to the micro-
finance endeavour:
• In pursuance of the Union Budget, 2005-06, the Micro Finance Development
Fund (MFDF) set up in the NABARD has been re-designated as the Microfinance
Development and Equity Fund (MFDEF) and its corpus has increased from Rs.100
crore to Rs.200 crore. The modalities in regard to the functioning of the MFDEF are
being worked out.
• The Internal Group (Chairman: Shri H.R. Khan) constituted by the Reserve
Bank to examine issues relating to rural credit and micro-finance
•  submitted its report in July 2005. Important recommendations of the Group
include providing comprehensive financial services in rural areas encompassing
savings, credit, remittance, insurance and pension products and establishing
linkages between banks and external entities based on two broad models viz.,
business facilitator model and business correspondent model. The recommendations
of the Group are under examination.
Revival of Rural Co-operative Banking Institutions and
Long-term Co-operative Credit Structure
The Task Force appointed by the Government (Chairman: Prof. A. Vaidyanathan) to
propose an action plan for reviving the rural co-operative banking institutions, and
suggesting an appropriate regulatory framework for these institutions submitted its
report in February 2005. The Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Task Force, in principle, and held consultative meetings with the State Governments.
Special Relief Measures by Banks in Areas
Affected by Natural Calamities
The Reserve Bank has issued guidelines/instructions to banks in regard to relief
measures to be provided in areas affected by natural calamities from time to
time. These guidelines cover various relief measures pertaining to credit to existing
borrowers, mainly in the agricultural sector. In the backdrop of the experience of
recent calamities, it is proposed to constitute an internal Working Group to examinethe whole gamut of issues and suggest suitable revisions to the existing guidelines,
with a view to making them comprehensive.
Prudential Measures
Capital Market Exposure Limits: Rationalisation
The Reserve Bank has undertaken a review of the prudential limits on the capital
market exposure with a view to rationalising them in terms of base and coverage.
Accordingly, it is proposed:
• to restrict bank's aggregate capital market exposure to 40 per cent of the net
worth of the bank on a solo and consolidated basis.
• to modify bank's consolidated direct capital market exposure to 20 per cent of
the bank's consolidated net worth.
• to simplify and rationalise the exemptions in regard to the coverage.
Banks exceeding these limits either on solo or consolidated basis, should approach
the Reserve Bank with a plan for bringing down the exposure within the permissible
limits.  Banks having sound internal controls and robust risk management systems
can approach the Reserve Bank for higher limits.  Guidelines in this regard would be
issued separately.
Prudential Provisioning Requirements: Review
Traditionally, banks' loans and advances portfolio is pro-cyclical and tends to grow
faster during an expansionary phase and grows slowly during a recessionary phase.
During times of expansion and accelerated credit growth, there is a tendency to
underestimate the level of inherent risk and the converse holds good during times of
recession. Taking into account the recent trends in the credit growth, it is proposed:
• to increase the general provisioning requirement for 'standard advances' from
the present level of 0.25 per cent to 0.40 per cent.  However, banks' direct advances
to agricultural and SME sectors would be exempted from the additional provisioning
requirement.  As hitherto, these provisions would be eligible for inclusion in Tier II
capital for capital adequacy purposes up to the permitted extent.
New Capital Adequacy Framework: Status
Draft guidelines for implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Framework have
been formulated and placed on the Reserve Bank's website.  In line with
international standards, banks were advised to adopt the Standardised Approach for
credit risk with effect from March 31, 2007. Banks adopting the Standardised
Approach would use the rating assigned by only those credit rating agencies which
are identified by the Reserve Bank.  Accordingly, an in-house Group of the Reserve
Bank has been constituted for identifying the external rating agencies. Final
guidelines would be issued on the basis of the recommendations of the Group and
the feedback received thereon.
The Reserve Bank has issued a 'Guidance Note on Management of Operational
Risk' in October 2005 to facilitate a smooth transition to the New Framework. Banks
using BIA are encouraged to comply with 'Sound Practices for the Management and
Supervision of Operational Risk' issued by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision (BCBS) in February 2003.
The BCBS has undertaken the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-5) to assess the
impact of adoption of New Capital Adequacy Framework. Twelve banks identified to
participate in the QIS-5.Capital Adequacy Requirements
The banks have been advised that those banks which have maintained regulatory
capital of at least nine per cent of the risk weighted assets for both credit as well as
market risks in respect of 'held for trading' (HFT) and 'available for sale' (AFS)
categories, as on March 31, 2006, would be permitted to treat the entire balance in
the investment fluctuation reserve (IFR) as Tier I capital.  Once the amount of IFR is
so transferred towards Tier I capital, a headroom for raising an equal amount of Tier
II capital would become available to the eligible banks, up to half of which could be
raised through issuance of subordinated debt.
Internationally, banks raise capital through equity shares and instruments such as
subordinated debt and preference shares which are eligible for inclusion in Tier I/Tier
II/Tier III capital. Banks in India, however, do not currently have such options
available except for raising Tier II capital through subordinated debt to a limited
extent. The Reserve Bank is examining various types of capital instruments that
could be permitted under the New Capital Adequacy Framework.
Corporate Debt Restructuring Mechanism
As mentioned in the annual policy Statement of April 2005, performance of the
corporate debt restructuring (CDR) mechanism was reviewed. The changes to the
existing CDR scheme have been finalised taking into account the feedback received.
Operational guidelines in this regard would be issued separately.
Supervisory Review Process
Having regard to the recent trends in the credit markets, it is proposed:
• to initiate a supervisory review process with select banks having significant
exposure to some sectors, namely, real estate, highly leveraged NBFCs, venture
capital funds and capital markets, in order to ensure that effective risk mitigants and
sound internal controls are in place for managing such exposures.
Financing of NBFCs
As indicated in the annual policy Statement, an Informal Working Group
(Chairperson: Smt. Usha Thorat) was constituted to examine the issues involved in
financing of NBFCs. The recommendations of the Group include extending bank
finance to NBFCs for permissible activities; using NBFCs as business
correspondents or agents;   permitting banks to rediscount the bills discounted by
NBFCs pertaining to the transport sector; using NBFCs as a conduit for providing
long-term funds to the SME sector; and extending training facilities to NBFCs
engaged in financing the SSI and agriculture sectors. The recommendations are
under examination.
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005: Status
A Working Group (Chairman: Shri Prashant Saran) was constituted with
representatives from the Reserve Bank, the IBA, the Credit Information Bureau of
India Ltd. (CIBIL) and select banks. The Group, in consultation with the Ministry of
Law, prepared the draft rules and regulations for implementation of the Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005. The draft rules and regulations are
being examined by the Reserve Bank.
Setting up of  Banking Codes and Standards Board of India: StatusModalities regarding setting up of an independent Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India (BCSBI) on the model of the mechanism in the UK are being worked
out in pursuance of the annual policy Statement of April 2005 in order to ensure that
a comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is established.
Financial Inclusion
The annual policy Statement of April 2005 while recognising the concerns in regard
to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract vast sections of
population, urged banks to review their existing practices to align them with the
objective of financial inclusion.  With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion all
banks need to make available a basic banking `no frills' account either with `nil' or
very low minimum balances as well as charges that would make such accounts
accessible to vast sections of population. All banks are urged to give wide publicity to
the facility of such a `no-frills' account so as to ensure greater financial inclusion.
Issue of Co-branded Debit Cards by Banks
At present, banks are required to obtain the Reserve Bank's approval for issue of
debit cards in tie-up with other non-bank entities for marketing and distribution
purposes. In order to further liberalise the procedure, it is proposed:
• to accord general permission to banks to issue debit cards in tie-up with non-
bank entities subject to certain conditions. Detailed instructions would be issued
separately.
Anti-Money Laundering Guidelines: Status
In November, 2004 the Reserve Bank revised the guidelines on ‘Know Your
Customer’ (KYC) principles in line with the recommendations made by the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) on Standards for Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and
Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT). Banks were advised to frame their KYC
policies with the approval of their boards and ensure that they are compliant with its
provisions by December 31, 2005.  In order to ensure that the inability of persons
belonging to low income groups to produce documents to establish their identity and
address does not lead to their financial exclusion and denial of banking services, a
simplified procedure has been provided for opening of account in respect of those
persons who do not intend to keep balances above Rs.50,000 and whose total credit
in one year is not expected to exceed Rs.1,00,000.
Institutional Developments
Payment and Settlement Systems
Electronic Payment Products: Status and Proposed Action
The coverage of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system has increased
significantly.  Connectivity is now available in 11,280 bank branches at 508 cities.
By end-March 2006, 15,000 branches are proposed to be covered and the number
of monthly transactions of the system is expected to expand from one lakh to two
lakh.
The National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) system for electronic transfer of
funds would be implemented in phases for all networked branches of banks all over
the country.
The pilot project for Cheque Truncation System, which aims at enhancing efficiency
in the retail cheque clearing sector, is expected to be implemented in New Delhi by
end-March 2006.The clearing position of banks in various clearing houses would be settled centrally
through a national settlement system (NSS) in order to enable banks to manage
liquidity in an efficient and cost effective manner. Accordingly, it is proposed to
introduce NSS in the four metropolitan centres by end-December 2005.
Umbrella Organisation for Retail Payment Systems: Progress
The Vision Document for Payment and Settlement Systems, 2005-2008 envisages
establishment of an institutional structure owned by banks and other financial
institutions for retail payment systems.  The IBA constituted a Working Group to
study the proposal. The Working Group has now recommended setting up of a
company under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 which would be owned and
operated by banks. The recommendations are under consideration and the new
organisation is likely to get operational with effect from April 1, 2006.
Business Continuity Plan: Contingency Plan
The Reserve Bank has drawn up a disaster recovery plan for all critical applications
including RTGS, the performance of which is tested at quarterly intervals. There is
also a need for banks to ensure that their plans for business continuity are adequate
and comprehensive which could resume business functionalities quickly in a
situation of disaster to transact normal business.  Banks are, therefore, urged to test
their business continuity plans periodically and ensure continuous service.
Urban Co-operative Banks
Vision Document for UCBs: Medium-term Framework
A medium-term framework for urban co-operative banks (UCBs) is being developed
on the basis of feedback received on the draft 'Vision Document for Urban Co-
operative Banks'. The Reserve Bank has signed a MoU with three State
Governments, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka, and is in the process of
entering into MoUs with other States having sizeable presence of UCBs. The draft
Vision Document also envisages that facilities and opportunities available to
commercial banks should, as far as possible, also be made available to UCBs other
than unit and single district banks with deposits less than Rs.100 crore. Accordingly,
it is proposed:
• to extend currency chest facility and issuance of licence to conduct foreign
exchange business (authorised person licence) to scheduled UCBs registered under
the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act and under the State Acts where the State
Governments concerned have assured regulatory coordination by entering into MoU
with the Reserve Bank. The eligibility norms for these facilities would be notified
separately.
Merger/Amalgamation of UCBs
Guidelines on merger/amalgamation in the UCB sector were issued by the Reserve
Bank with a view to facilitating emergence of strong entities and for providing an
avenue for non-disruptive exit of unviable entities. In order to further smoothen the
process of merger in the UCB sector, it is proposed:
• to permit the acquirer UCB to amortise the losses taken over from the
acquired UCB over a period of not more than five years, including the year of
merger.90 Days Norm for UCBs: Relaxation
The Reserve Bank has relaxed the 90 days delinquency norm for certain categories
of UCBs on request. The relaxation would be valid up to end-March 2007.
Restructuring of Weak Scheduled UCBs
The Reserve Bank has begun a consultative process for revitalisation and
rehabilitation of weak scheduled UCBs. 10 weak scheduled UCBs are in the process
of restructuring and the Reserve Bank is monitoring their progress.
The Right to Information Act, 2005
Pursuant to the enactment Right to Information Act, 2005, the Reserve Bank has
designated the Chief General Manager-in-Charge of Department of Administration
and Personnel Management as the Chief Public Information Officer.  Details of the
scheme regarding implementation of the provisions of the Act have been placed on
the Reserve Bank's website.
Computation of Exchange Rate Indices - New Series
The Reserve Bank has recently updated its nominal effective exchange rates
(NEER) and real effective exchange rates (REER) indices. The 5-country indices
have been replaced by new 6-currency indices. The Chinese Renminbi and the
Hong Kong Dollar are included, while French franc and Deutsche mark are replaced
by the Euro. The new indices use 3-year moving average trade weights in place of
the fixed trade weights. The new series would be published in the the Reserve Bank
of India Bulletin of December 2005. Simultaneously, the broader 36-country indices
of NEER and REER, with 1985 as the base year, will be updated to 1993-94 as the
base year.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/503