PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 24, 2005
Issue of Rs.100 denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series
with additional/new security features without inset letter in numbering
panel bearing the signature of Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs.100 denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series without inset letter in numbering panel bearing the signature of
Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor. The new series 2005 banknotes will be of the same size and
there is no change in the colour/design/images of the banknotes both at the obverse
(front) and the reverse (back). All the security features have been mentioned in the
earlier Press Release dated August 10, 2005, and the salient additional/new security
features of the Rs.100 banknotes are as under :
Obverse (front)
Security Thread : The new series 2005 banknotes in Rs.100 denomination will have
machine readable windowed demetalised clear text magnetic 2 mm wide security thread
with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and "RBI" with exclusive colour shift. Colour of the thread shall
shift from green to blue when viewed from different angles. It will fluoresce in yellow on
the reverse and the text will fluoresce on the obverse under ultraviolet light. The thread
will be visible as a continuous line from behind when held up against light.
See-through Register : The floral design printed both on the front  (hollow) and back
(filled up) of the Rs.100 banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the
watermark window will have the denominational numeral 100. Half of the numeral is
printed on the obverse (front) and half on the reverse (back). Both the printed portions
have an accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when
viewed against light.
Electrolyte Watermark : In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 100 appears alongside Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the
watermark window.
Omron anti-photocopying feature : The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles on either side of the legend "ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¢£{¸¨¸Ä ¤¸ÿˆÅ" and 'Reserve Bank of India'.
Intaglio print : The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal, guarantee and
promise clause, Ashoka Pillar emblem on the left, RBI Governor's signature, and
identification mark for the visually impaired are printed in intaglio, i.e., in raised prints
(felt by touch) and have been made more prominent by raising the depth.
Reverse (back)
Year of printing : Year of printing will appear on the reverse of the Rs.100 banknote.
Omron anti-photocopying feature : The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles in the right hand margin of the Rs.100 banknote.
All banknotes in the denomination of Rs.100 issued by the Reserve Bank in the
past will continue to be legal tender.
   G. Raghuraj
Press Release: 2005-2006/246       Deputy General Manager