` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 1, 2005
Report of the internal Technical Group on the
Central Government Securities Market
The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003
ushered in significant changes in the contextual setting and operating framework
for the conduct of monetary policy, public debt management and regulatory
oversight of the Government securities market by the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI). Recognizing that the participation of RBI in the primary issues of
Government securities will stand withdrawn with effect from April 1, 2006 under
the FRBM Act, the Mid-Term Review of the RBI’s Annual Policy Statement for the
year 2004-05 envisaged that “open market operations (OMO) will become a more
active instrument, warranting a review of processes and technological
infrastructure consistent with market advancements” The Mid-Term Review also
announced that a Study Group would be constituted “for strengthening the OMO
framework to address these emerging needs and equip RBI as well as the market
participants appropriately”. Accordingly, an internal Technical Group on Central
Government Securities Market was constituted to suggest modifications to the
primary auction process, measures to enhance the depth and liquidity of the
secondary market, consider a more active framework for OMOs and to suggest
steps for strengthening of processes and technological infrastructure within the
RBI to support the modified primary issuance process and active debt market
operations framework.
The major recommendations of the Group are: -
(i) RBI may keep the option to participate in the secondary market as
considered appropriate with a view to contain excessive volatility and
promote orderly market conditions as well as to improve market liquidity in
Government securities.
(ii) Primary Dealers may underwrite the entire 100 per cent of the notified
amount of each auction.
(iii) PDs may be vested with market making obligations, in both the wholesale
segment and the retail or mid segment. RBI may consider preferential
access to PDs as its secondary market counterparts on the basis of relative
secondary market performance in both wholesale and retail segments.
(iv) The Group made various recommendations to further develop the
efficiency and liquidity of secondary markets for Government securities
such as active consolidation of securities, introduction of short selling of
Government securities in a phased manner and with appropriate
safeguards, introduction of When Issued market, and a securities
borrowing window for PDs.2
(v) The Group also felt that permitted structures for PD business may be
expanded to include banks directly undertaking PD activity as a department
with independent subsidiary books of account. Simultaneously, exposure of
standalone PDs to non-Government securities as well as off-balance sheet
business should be limited.
(vi) The Group recommended changes in accounting practices such as
charging appreciation as well as depreciation on securities in the Available
for Sale category to equity instead of Profit & Loss account, adoption of fair
value accounting so as to recognize both gains and losses in the case of
the Held-for-Trading portfolio and introduction of comprehensive
accounting standards covering all derivative instruments.
(vii) In the area of infrastructure, the Group made recommendations for speedy
integration of Security Settlement System with RTGS, appropriate changes
to NDS system to accommodate the changes proposed in the Report,
routing of primary and OMO auctions through CCIL and an effective
performance monitoring and surveillance module, either on NDS or as a
standalone.
The Group noted that some of the recommendations made by it will alter
the debt issuance system/ prevailing regulation and therefore require prior
consultations with the Government before they could be implemented.
The full text of the Report is available at www.rbi.org.in. Views/ comments
may please be sent to navinnambiar@rbi.org.in or saknair@rbi.org.in or faxed to
022-2264 4158/ 022-2265 9609 by August 01, 2005.
Ajit Prasad
   Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/8