PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 5, 2005
RBI to set up Banking Codes & Standards Board of India
The Reserve Bank of India today stated that it was working out the detailed
modalities for setting up of the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India. It
had, in the Annual Policy Statement for 2005-06 (paragraph 102) announced
setting up of an independent Banking Codes and Standards Board of India to
ensure that comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is
evolved and adhered to. As announced in the Policy, the Board was to be evolved
on the model of the mechanism in the UK. The Committee on Procedure and
Performance Audit on Public Services (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore) had
recommended setting up of a Banking Codes and Standards Board of India.
The extracts from the Tarapore Committee Report relating to the setting up
of the Board are:
(i) “The Committee considers that its previous reports deal with different
aspects of overall customer service rendered to the Common Person.
The observations contained therein lay bare the state of affairs. Its
recommendations, unlike some other reports, like the Chore Committee,
are such that even if they are not implemented in full, i.e. in letter and
spirit, a bank’s business per se would not be affected. For instance,
without implementing the Chore Committee Report a bank could not do
its lending business in a meaningful way. The recommendations of the
present Committee are, therefore, in spirit suggestions and not
mandatory instructions. What is required, therefore, is a change in the
mind-set.
(ii) It is observed that in an organised society such fundamental changes in
approach are brought about by the players themselves, proactively
changing and also by creating an institutional framework which exerts
healthy pressure on the players in the system.  While a benchmarking
system would be a creative response of the banking system, the
Committee considers that providing an institutional framework that
evaluates and oversees the observance of the code of conduct by banks
would exert healthy virtuous pressure on the banks. RBI being
preoccupied with its Regulatory/Supervisory functions is not suited to
perform this function nor is it philosophically equipped to do this.
(iii) The Committee recognises that considerable work has been undertaken
by the RBI and the banks to introduce Banking Codes and Standards.
To bring this commendable work to fruition the Committee considered
various alternative initiatives. First, the RBI could set up a Department of
Performance Audit of Banks which would monitor customer service in
terms of adherence to Banking Codes and Standards and take2
appropriate adverse action, where necessary. The Committee had
serious reservations to this alternative as it would, in some ways, merely
replicate the Annual Inspection by the RBI and it would bureaucratise
the efforts to bring about a significant and enduring improvement in
customer services. Secondly, the Committee considered whether the
Banking Ombudsman mechanism could be expanded to over the
observance of Banking Codes and Standards. The Committee felt that
the Ombudsman Scheme was tailored to deal with individual grievances
rather than dealing with systemic problems which required a wider
approach.  Thirdly, the Committee considered whether the IBA, which
has spearheaded the work on the voluntary Code on Fair Practices,
could be the agency to keep tract of observance of Codes and
Standards.  The Committee felt that IBA, with its present structure,
would not be able to effectively monitor the observance of Banking
Codes and Standards, as it is not even a Self Regulatory Organisation.
While finding these alternatives not feasible the Committee was fully
conscious of the fact that the RBI should not get involved into micro
regulation and, therefore, it is necessary to devise some institutional
mechanism which does not have the drawbacks of the above
alternatives but also has sufficient clout in the system to effectively
monitor the Codes and Standards.
(iv) It is the considered view of the Committee that a Banking Codes and
Standards Board of India (BCSBI) should be set up, in the course of
the year 2005, as an independent organisation but strongly supported
by the RBI and that it should be fully funded by the RBI. Unless the
Board is supported by the RBI as a truly independent organisation and
funded entirely by the RBI, such an institution is unlikely to take off,
much less be effective.  As such, the Committee urges the RBI to bear
the financial cost of this institution in the best interests of the entire
banking system and more particularly the interests of the common
person as customer.
(v) There would need to be a formal covenant between a bank and the
Board, which would inter alia include the disciplinary powers of the
Board and this document would serve as a Registration.
(vi) The Board could consist of five members drawn from different
disciplines such as banking, law and accountancy.
(vii) The Board could be assisted by a small staff of qualified and
experienced persons say not exceeding a dozen technical staff.
(viii) In addition to the Board’s own staff there could be a large number of
Relationship Managers (RMs) who would not be the Board’s staff but
they would be remunerated by the Board and would report to the Board
on their findings.  Each RM would be required to attend to a specified
number of banks/branches at select locations. The RM would use a
variety of instruments to collect information based on press reports,
incognito visits and formal visits to banks/branches to assess adherence
to the Codes and Standards.  The Board would draw up specific formats
in which the Relationship Managers would report their findings.
(ix) In cases where the Board has serious concerns the Board could appoint
a special team of auditors to examine the matter in depth. The cost of
the audit could be borne by the concerned bank.  Based on the Reports3
of the RMs and the Board’s own assessment and the audit report the
concerned bank would be asked to explain in writing any deviations from
the Codes and Standards and its own Compliance Report. The Board
would give its decision on a case only after giving the bank an
opportunity to make an oral presentation before the Board. The Board’s
judgement would be final and not subject to revision/arbitration by any
other body.  While this procedure may appear peremptory the
Committee would like to stress that the entire framework would be
based on a covenant between the bank and the Board and the case
would go through a myriad of processing.
(x) The sanctions by the Board could, for instance, include the following :
a) Publication by the Board of the banks name and details of the
breach,
b) Inclusion of details of the breach in the Board’s Annual Report,
c) Issue of instructions to banks on remedial action,
d) Warning or reprimand,
e) Public censure, and
f) Cancellation of registration with the Board.
(xi) There would be a process of rectification by the bank and final penal
action would be the extreme step.  The Board would have the power to
delist an accredited bank and the covenant between the bank and the
Board would require that a delisted bank would have to report the matter
in its balance sheet. Per contra accredited banks would be able to
clearly state that they are parties to the Codes and Standards as agreed
to between the banks and the Board. The Board would be empowered
to report to regulatory authorities such matter, as it deems appropriate.
(xii) While the banks have introduced a Fair Practices Code, this Code will
need further elaborating and strengthening before it can form part of the
covenant between the banks and the Board.”
The Committee has drawn upon the institutional arrangement in UK where
a separate board has been set up to oversee the code drawn by the banks’
association (http://www.bankingcode.org.uk/). The Banking Code of the British
Bankers Association (BBA) is a voluntary code, which sets standards of good
banking practices for financial institutions to follow when they are dealing with
personal customers in the UK. It provides valuable protection for customers on a
day to day basis as also in the times of financial difficulty.  The Code applies to
savings deposits and current accounts, card products and services, loans and
overdrafts and payment services including foreign exchange.
Alpana Killawala
     Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1153