PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
December 27, 2005
RBI announces Measures towards promoting Financial Inclusion
The Reserve Bank of India today announced a slew of measures aimed at taking
banking services to the small man (Financial Inclusion). The circulars issued by the
central bank contain the following:
I.    Widening the Scope of RRBs:
(i) Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) have been advised to offer 'no frills'
account facilities with zero or low minimum balance requirements as also nominal
charges, so as to make such accounts available to vast sections of the population.
Further, they have been advised to explore the provision of small clean overdraft facility
in such accounts without linkage to purpose. The procedures for opening such
accounts, including KYC compliance, will be simple.
(ii)           In order to make RRBs important vehicles of credit delivery in rural
areas, the Reserve Bank has announced a special package designed to give a fillip to
their resource base. These measures will enable them to avail lines of credit from
sponsor banks at reasonable rates of interest, access to inter-RRB term money/
borrowings and also to repo/CBLO markets.
       (iii) RRBs have been permitted to set up ATMs, issue debit/credit cards
and also to handle pension/Government business as sub-agents of banks authorised to
conduct Government business.
(iv) The Reserve Bank will consider, on a case by case basis, requests
from RRBs for opening of currency chests and is also actively considering the possibility
of permitting them to undertake non-trade related current account foreign exchange
transactions for specified purposes, such as, overseas education, medical treatment,
private visits, etc.
II.     Introduction of General Credit Card:
The Reserve Bank has advised scheduled commercial banks and RRBs to
introduce a General Credit Card (GCC) Scheme for issuing GCC to their customers in
rural and semi-urban areas. The GCC will operate like the Kisan Credit Card and there
will be no linkage to purpose or end-use of funds or security. The GCC can also be
used for withdrawing cash against the limit sanctioned. Fifty per cent of the outstanding
amount will be treated as indirect finance to agriculture. Women will be given
preferential treatment under the GCC Scheme. Banks have been asked to utilise the
services of local post offices, schools, primary health centres, local government
functionaries, farmers' associations/clubs, etc., for sourcing of borrowers for issuance of
GCC. Detailed guidelines have been communicated to banks in this regard.III.    OTS Scheme for Small Borrowers and Eligibility for Fresh Loans
With a view to giving small borrowers an opportunity to settle their non-
performing accounts with banks and become eligible for fresh finance, all scheduled
commercial banks (including RRBs and Local Area Banks) have been advised to
provide a simple mechanism for one-time settlement (OTS) of loans for the principal
amount upto Rs. 25,000 and which have become doubtful or loss assets as on
September 30, 2005. State Level Bankers Committees will evolve State specific
guidelines for loans granted under Government sponsored schemes. This scheme will
not cover cases of frauds and malfeasance.
These measures have been formulated pursuant to the central bank's Annual
Policy Statement for the year 2005-06 which gave high priority to Financial Inclusion of
a large section of the population which has not been able to avail various banking
services and facilities.
Alpana Killawala
Press Release: 2005-2006/787                                                    Chief General Manager