PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 24, 2005
RBI releases Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India: 2004-05
The Reserve Bank of India has today released its Report on Trend and
Progress of Banking in India, 2004-05. The Report gives a detailed account of the
policy developments and performance of commercial banks, co-operative banks
and non-banking financial institutions during 2004-05. The Report is divided into
seven chapters and contains detailed statistical tables on several parameters
relating to the operations and performance of various financial institutions.
Overview
The first chapter entitled ‘Overview’ provides a synoptic view of the
macroeconomic developments in the global and the Indian economy, as also the
performance of various financial institutions during 2004-05.
Policy Developments in Commercial Banking
The second chapter on 'Policy Developments in Commercial Banking' provides
a detailed account of the policy initiatives undertaken in the banking sector during
2004-05. These relate to credit delivery, regulatory and supervisory measures,
technological developments, payments and settlement systems and legal reforms.
The Reserve Bank continued to strengthen the supervisory framework consistent
with the increasing market orientation of the economy with a view to enhancing
efficiency and financial stability. The policy measures have been primarily guided
by the objectives of increasing operational efficiency of monetary policy,
strengthening the credit delivery mechanism, prudential norms and risk
management systems with particular reference to the adoption of Basel II norms,
and enhancing accounting standards and corporate governance. This was
reinforced by several initiatives to develop technological and institutional
infrastructure. The issue of financial inclusion has been engaging the attention of
the Reserve Bank and increasing emphasis has been placed on the facilitation of
transactions and access to the banking system for the common person.
Operations and Performance of Commercial Banks
This Chapter analyses the performance of the commercial banks during the
year, based on their audited financial results. The focus of the Chapter is on
analysis of diversification of banks’ portfolio. The shifting pattern of banks’ revenue
and performance patterns have also been analysed at the aggregated level as well
as major bank group-wise. The analysis covers important financial indicators, such
as, income, expenditure, profits, spread, non-performing assets and capital to risk-
weighted assets ratio, apart from a detailed disaggregated picture of balance
sheets of commercial banks.
The coverage of the Chapter has been expanded in this year‘s Report by
including new sections on ‘Banks' Operations in the Capital Market’, ‘Technological
Progress in Banks’ and ‘Customer Service in Banks’. The section on capital market
operations of banks covers banks' operations in both primary and secondary2
markets and shareholding pattern of banks in a comprehensive manner. The
section on technological progress in banks covers branches and ATMs of banks,
and computerisation of banks.
The major points emerging from the analysis are set out below:
• Reversing the decelerating trends of the previous years, bank credit exhibited
robust growth during the year.
• The credit offtake was also broad-based with agriculture and industry joining
the housing and retail segments in driving up the demand for credit.
• Growth of deposits slowed down, albeit marginally.
• In order to meet the increased demand for credit, banks increased recourse to
non-deposit resources and restricted fresh investment in Government
securities.
• Banks, in general, were successful in weathering the impact of an upturn in
the interest rate cycle supported by a sharp increase in net-interest income.
• Asset quality of Scheduled Commercial Banks improved further during 2004-
05 as reflected in the decline in gross non-performing assets in absolute terms
for the third year in succession despite the switch over to the 90-day
delinquency norm with effect from March 2004.
• Banks’ capital base kept pace with the sharp increase in risk-weighted assets.
• Improved business and financial performance was reflected in a sharp rise in
prices of most of the bank stocks.
Developments in Co-operative Banking
The Chapter outlines major policy initiatives during the year. These include
issuance of the Vision Document and Medium-term Framework for Urban Co-
operative Banks, revival plans for weak banks and framework for
mergers/amalgamations for the sector. The recommendations of the Task Force
on Rural Co-operative banks have also been covered. The performance of urban
co-operative banks and issues relating to the short-term and long-term structure of
the rural co-operative banks are discussed separately alongwith a discussion on
the regional spread and performance of each segment of the co-operative banking.
Detailed information on operations and financial performance of Primary
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) has been included for the first time in the
Report as a part of the analysis pertaining to the rural co-operatives. The
discussion on micro-finance  includes the different models emerging in the area.
The role played by National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) in financing and monitoring the rural co-operative banking sector,
besides administering various development schemes in the agricultural and rural
sector has been discussed in a separate section.
The major points emerging from the Chapter are set out below:
• Business operations and financial performance of co-operative credit
institutions during the year showed divergent trends.
• Assets of scheduled Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) and State co-operative
banks expanded during 2004-05.
• Despite an improvement in net interest income, profitability of scheduled UCBs
declined, due mainly to a sharp decline in non-interest income. The profitability
of State co-operative banks declined during the year, while that of CCBs
improved.3
• The overall business of PACS continued to expand, despite decline in deposits.
Although the asset quality of PACS improved during the year, overdues
continued to remain high.
• Assets of long-term rural co-operatives, i.e., the State Co-operative Agricultural
and Rural Development Banks (SCARDBs) and Primary Co-operative
Agricultural and Rural Development Banks (PCARDBs), witnessed a moderate
growth. However, their financial performance worsened as they continued to
incur significant overall losses during the year.
• Asset quality of UCBs did not record any noticeable change. The asset quality
of all the layers of rural co-operative banks, other than PACS, deteriorated.
• A significant development during the year was a sharp increase in the Self Help
Group (SHG)-Bank linkage programme and financial assistance extended to
micro-finance institutions (MFIs) by both commercial and co-operative banks.
Non-Banking Financial Institutions
This new Chapter combines the erstwhile Chapters on 'Financial Institutions'
(Chapter V) and 'Non-Banking Financial Companies' (Chapter VI) of the previous
year's Report. The new Chapter analyses three sets of institutions, viz., financial
institutions, non-banking financial companies and primary dealers. The policy
developments, business operations and financial performance for each category
have been discussed separately. The section on NBFCs has been structured into
three sub-sections. These are: (i) NBFCs (Excluding Residuary Non-banking
Companies (RNBCs), (ii) Residuary Non-banking Companies (RNBCs), and
(iii) NBFCs not accepting Public Deposits and with Assets Size of Rs.500 crore
and above. In addition to data for the year 2003-04, the current Report contains
updated information for 2004-05. The direction of policies continued to focus on the
specific set of institutions with emphasis on prudential regulations for financial
institutions and NBFCs, directed investments for RNBCs and institutional and
market development measure for the PDs.
The major points emerging from the analysis are set out below:
• Business operations of FIs expanded during 2004-05, reversing the trend of the
previous year.
• Financial performance of FIs also improved, resulting from an increase in net
interest income.
• Significant improvement was also observed in the asset quality of FIs, in
general. The capital adequacy ratio of FIs continued to remain at a high level,
notwithstanding some decline during the year.
• Business operations of NBFCs, which contracted sharply during 2003-04
reflecting mainly the impact of decline in resource mobilisation, expanded
marginally during 2004-05.
• Profitability of NBFCs improved in 2003-04 and 2004-05 mainly on account of
containment of expenditure.
• While gross NPAs of NBFCs, as a group, declined during 2003-04 and 2004-
05, net NPAs after declining marginally during 2003-04, increased significantly
during 2004-05.
• Although capital adequacy of NBFCs continued to be comfortable, on the
whole, there was increase in the number of NBFCs with CRAR less than 12 per
cent and decline in NBFCs with CRAR above 30 per cent.
• The business of large NBFCs not accepting public deposits, but with asset size
of Rs.500 crore and above, continued to expand. These NBFCs earned
substantial profits and improved their asset quality during the year.4
• PDs, as a group, incurred net losses during the year, mainly due to large
trading losses as against trading profits in the previous year. Notwithstanding
the losses, PDs continued to maintain high capital adequacy ratios.
Financial Stability
The purpose of the financial stability Chapter, in general, is to identify at an
early stage any trends of vulnerability that may be seen as likely to emerge in the
financial system. This Chapter reviews the stability of the financial system in India
in terms of financial institutions, financial markets and financial infrastructure. The
Chapter on financial stability focuses on the significance of the policy actions of the
Reserve Bank as well as the key developments during 2004-05 from the financial
stability perspective. As financial markets in the financial stability chapter are being
introduced for the first time, the key developments during 2004-05 have been
assessed somewhat in historical perspective.
The following main points emerge from the analysis in the Chapter:
• The performance indicators of the Indian banking system are increasingly
converging to international benchmarks.
• Various segments of financial markets have deepened and widened over the
years which have enhanced the stability of the system.
• The perception of money market participants about counter party credit risk
remained stable during 2004-05.
• Conditions in the foreign exchange markets also remained broadly stable
during the year.
• The hardening of yield in the Government securities market led to significant
portfolio adjustments.
• The financing conditions for the corporates improved significantly during
2004-05.
• The reliance of the corporate sector on the banking system is declining.
• Volatility in the stock markets has reduced over the years.
• With the introduction of RTGS, the systemic risk in the system has reduced
considerably.
• The RTGS has been functioning satisfactorily and it stood the test of
business continuity planning during heavy rains on July 26 and 27, 2005.
 The Chapter attempts to identify the main sources of risks and vulnerability
that could pose challenges for the financial system in the near future. The overall
assessment of the financial system as summarized at the end of this Chapter
states that while the overall quality of the banking system has improved
significantly over the years, banks could now face some uncertainties in respect of
market risk.
Perspectives
The final Chapter on ‘Perspectives’ highlights some of the emerging issues
facing the Indian banking system. These include, inter alia, credit delivery and
pricing, customer service and financial inclusion competition and consolidation.
The Report is available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in).
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/631