PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 05, 2005
RBI expands data coverage of its “Database on Indian Economy”
As announced in the Press Release dated November 01, 2004, the
Reserve Bank of India provided the public with access to the published data
series, with additional details on some series as available in its data
warehouse. The data series for the public access have been made available
through a link titled  "Database on Indian Economy", so far on the Home Page
of the Bank's web site. This is now shifted to the Statistics Page of the Bank's
revamped site (www.rbi.org.in). Alternatively, this can be accessed directly by
the URL https://cdbmsi.reservebank.org.in/. The list of the data series currently
available is given in the home page of the site. This list is being progressively
enlarged on the basis of feedback received and availability of relevant data
series in the Bank's data warehouse. The Bank is releasing another set of data
series in the seventh release today.
The Static reports released today are:
(a) Principal Commodity wise Exports – Yearly, (b) Principal Commodity wise
Imports – Yearly, (c) Direction of Foreign Trade – Yearly, (d) External
Assistance to India – Yearly, (e) NRI Deposits Inflows(+)/Outflows(-) – Yearly,
(f) Industrial Production at 4-digit Level (NIC-87) – By Usage, (g) Industrial
Production at 4-digit Level (NIC-87) – By Industry Groups, (h) Outright
Transactions in State Government Securities – Yield, (i) Outright Transactions
in State Government Securities – Face Value, (j) Outright Transaction in
Treasury Bills – Yield, and (k) Outright Transaction in Treasury Bills – Face
Value
The Data Query reports are:
(a) Outright Transactions in Government Dated Securities - Face Value, (b)
Outright Transactions in Government Dated Securities – Yield, (c) Redemption
Yield on GoI Securities Based on SGL Transactions, (d) Advances under
Priority Sectors by SCBs-State-wise, Region-wise, (e) Outstanding Advances
of SCBs to Agriculture-State-wise, Region-wise, (f) Outstanding Advances of
SCBs to SSIs, Industrial Estates and Road & Water Transport Operators –
State-wise, Region-wise, (g) Outstanding Advances to Priority Sectors by
Public Sector Banks (PSBs) – Bank-wise, Bank Group-wise, (h) Outstanding
Advances to Other Priority Sectors by PSBs, and (i) Outstanding Loans &
Advances to SSIs by PSBs
With the release of the above data series, there would be 118 static
reports (subject and frequency wise), 57 subject wise and 53 frequency wise
data query templates covering various sectors of Indian economy.
P. V. Sadanandan
          Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/284