PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 8, 2005
Sixteenth State Finance Secretaries Meet
The 16th Conference of the State Finance Secretaries was held in the
Reserve Bank of India today. Finance Secretaries of 25 States participated.
Dr. C.Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister and Chairman, Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) and former
Governor, Reserve Bank of India delivered the inaugural address in the
Conference. Senior officials from Ministry of Finance, Government of India,
Planning Commission and representatives from the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General attended the Conference. Smt. Shyamala Gopinath,
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India chaired the Conference. Shri
V.K.Sharma, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India and other senior
officials of the Reserve Bank were present.
Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor who welcomed the
participants said that the Report of the Twelfth Finance Commission is an
important milestone in the area of federal-fiscal-relations and that it will further
facilitate cooperative fiscal federalism.
In his inaugural address, Dr. Rangarajan congratulated the Reserve
Bank in organising this Conference so that the full implications of the various
recommendations of the TFC are understood. Noting the existence of vertical
and horizontal imbalances in federal fiscal systems, the TFC had
recommended a scheme of fiscal transfers that could serve the objectives of
equity and efficiency within a framework of fiscal consolidation. He stated that
as far as vertical transfers were concerned, the Commission had
recommended an increase in the share of states in the divisible pool of taxes
to 30.5 per cent from the previous level of 29.5 per cent. As regards horizontal
imbalance, the Commission had struck a balance among various criteria, he
added. Dwelling on the role of grants, Dr. Rangarajan noted that the TFC had
increased the share of grants to 19 per cent of total transfers compared to
around 13 per cent in the Eleventh Finance Commission. He also noted that
the per capita transfers, comprising tax devolution and grants, show the
redistributive character of transfers. He pointed out that the Commission had
also laid emphasis on strengthening the local bodies. He noted that the
scheme of debt relief, which was in two parts, would be available only if states
enacted appropriate legislations, to bring down the revenue deficit to zero by
2008-09 and commit to reducing the fiscal deficit in a phased manner. With
the debt relief recommended, it should be possible for states to pursue their
developmental goals with fiscal prudence. The condition imposed also
mitigated the moral hazard problem. Dr. Rangarajan further  underlined the
need for institutional changes to tackle structural problems in managing
government finances and urged the States to  decide their annual borrowing
programme within the framework of their respective fiscal responsibility2
legislations. He pointed out that an independent body like a Loan Council
could supervise the overall limit to the borrowings from all sources for each
state. He emphasized that the restructured public finance would result in
increase in aggregate saving rate as well as in aggregate investment so that
growth is stabilized at above 7 per cent. Dr. Rangarajan concluded by saying
that the virtuous cycle of reforms, robust government finances, and an
equalising system of fiscal transfers should help establish a sound federal
fiscal system in India.
In his presidential remarks, Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of
India, stated that while each individual agency would initiate action to
implement the recommendations the Reserve Bank would participate in the
modalities for smooth transition for the market borrowing programme of the
States, with State Governments and the Government of India. The Governor
announced that the Reserve Bank has decided to set up an Advisory
Committee on Ways and Means Advances to State Governments to revisit the
ways and means advances for states. It may be recalled that the
Ramachandran Committee in January 2003 had, while recommending Ways
and Means Scheme for State Governments suggested that the issue might be
revisited after the receipt of Twelfth Finance Commission's Report.
The Reserve Bank has been, since 1997, organising the State Finance
Secretaries' Conference twice every year. The Conference provides  a  useful
forum for interaction among State Finance Secretaries, senior officials of
Government of India, Planning Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General
and the Reserve Bank of India.
Today's Conference deliberated on policy implications of the
recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission. It also discussed
operational issues relating to States' Market Borrowings, Consolidated Sinking
Fund and Guarantee Redemption Fund, etc.
    Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1058