PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 29, 2005
RBI activates Relief Measures through banks
in Maharashtra affected by unprecedented rains and floods
The Reserve Bank of India has today advised banks to liberally extend
its relief package for the State of Maharashtra which has witnessed
unprecedented rains leading to floods and destruction of life and property.
Bank branches have been directed to initiate the package of measures
immediately after the District/State Authorities declare the District/State as
calamity affected area and to provide financial assistance to the agriculturists,
small scale industrial units, artisans, small businesses and trading
establishments affected by the calamity.
The measures include consumption loans to persons affected by
calamities for sustenance, waiver of margin requirements or considering as
margin the grants, subsidies provided by state governments, provision of
credit not only to existing borrowers but also to other eligible persons as also
conversion and rescheduling/restructuring of existing loans.  The package
also includes providing to affected persons term loans for developmental
purposes. Further, banks while using their discretion on charging of interest
are required to view such cases sympathetically and consider waiving of penal
interest to be charged for default of current dues and deferment of
compounding of interest. In addition to the above, banks have been advised to
increase the limit of consumption loan to be provided to the affected persons
in the state upto Rs 5,000 without any collateral. The limit may be enhanced
to Rs.10,000 at the discretion of the branch manager, depending on the
repaying capacity of the borrower. Further, the banks have been asked to
expeditiously restore banking services in the affected areas.
The Reserve Bank has asked the convenor bank for the State of
Maharashtra to convene a Special State Level Bankers’ Committee meeting
immediately to discuss the situation and to consider and recommend any
special measures that might be required in the affected areas in addition to
the Reserve Bank's relief package.
    G. Raghuraj
    Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/130