` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 25, 2005
Reserve Bank releases Report on Credit Card Regulations
The Reserve Bank released the Report of the Working Group on
Regulatory Mechanism for cards on its website (www.rbi.org.in)  Payment of
penalty to the recipient of unsolicited card in case the card got activated
without the approval of the recipient, Code of conduct for direct selling agents,
"Do Not Call Registry" website to be maintained by the Indian Banks'
Association, sending the most important terms and conditions highlighting
crucial items to the customers at all the stages and authorising the Banking
Ombudsman to redress the customer grievances relating to card business
were some of the major recommendations made by the Working Group.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank had, in October 2004,
announced the setting up of a Working Group for Regulatory Mechanism for
Cards. The Reserve Bank had been receiving a number of complaints
regarding undesirable/objectionable practices by credit card issuing
banks/institutions and their agents.   The main area of regulatory concern with
regard to the fast expanding plastic card usage in India related to the issue of
customer services/consumer protection.  Keeping in view this objective and
the international scenario and practices relating to the plastic card business
the Working Group was expected to suggest regulatory measures that were
required to be introduced for plastic cards, while encouraging their growth in a
safe, secure and efficient manner.  It was also expected to recommend
measures to ensure that the rules, regulations, standards and practices of the
card issuers were in alignment with the best customer practices. In addition,
the Working Group was required to draw a roadmap for setting up of
grievances redressal mechanism for the card users.
The Group has recommended that the terms and conditions for card
issuing and usage should be clear in a simple language and comprehensible
to a layman.  These should be prominently displayed, readable and the crucial
items should be highlighted through a most important terms and conditions
document.  The card issuing bank would also need to clearly mention theinterest charges on annualised basis in all communications to the card holder.
The Group has also recommended that the card issuing banks should
introduce a comprehensive code of conduct for their direct selling agents
(DSAs)/direct marketing agents (DMAs) and suitably penalise those firms
which violate this code.  The Group has recommended adoption of the Code
formulated for the DSAs by the Indian Banks' Association.
The Group has also made further recommendations with regard to
protecting the customer's right to privacy of information, including maintaining
the Do Not Call Registry.  The Group has recommended that the Indian
Banks' Association might set up a website where customers could register
their phone numbers and the Indian Banks' Association could periodically and
in a confidential manner circulate the contents of the Do Not Call Registry
among card issuing banks.  The Group has recommended that the Banking
Ombudsman could initially arbitrate any credit card dispute between card
holders and card issuing banks.  According to the Group, unsolicited cards
should not be issued to a non-customer.  In case an unsolicited card got
activated without the approval of the recipient and the recipient got billed for
the same, the card issuing bank would not only immediately reverse the
charges but would also pay a penalty to the recipient of the card amounting to
twice the value of the reversed charges.
The Working Group has also recommended that the card issuing banks
should consider setting up of a self regulated body on the lines of Indian
Banks' Association, Fixed Income and Money Market Dealers Association and
Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association of India to deliberate on issues of
common interest affecting all card issuing banks.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/1111