PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 5, 2005
Finance Minister meets the Directors of the RBI Central Board
The customary post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank
of India with the Finance Minister was held at New Delhi today. The meeting
was also attended by Shri K M Chandrasekhar, Secretary, Revenue and Shri
D. Swarup, Secretary, Expenditure.
Besides Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank, Dr. Rakesh Mohan,
Secretary, Economic Affairs, Smt. K J Udeshi, Shri V.Leeladhar and Smt.
Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank, the other
Directors of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India present at the
meeting included Dr. A.S. Ganguly, Chairman, ICICI OneSource Ltd., Shri Y.
H. Malegam, Chartered Accountant, Prof. Mihir Rakshit, Director, Monetary
Research Project, ICRA, Shri H. P. Ranina, Advocate, Supreme Court of
India, Shri K. Madhava Rao, State Election Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh,
Shri K. P. Singh, Chairman, DLF Group and Prof. V. S. Vyas, Former Director,
IIM, Ahmedabad, Shri N. R. Narayana Murthy, Chief Mentor, Infosys and Shri
D. S . Brar, Director.
In his address to the Reserve Bank Board, the Finance Minister explained that
the budget had to keep in view various factors, such as, the mandate of the
National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) and the recommendations
of the Twelfth Finance Commission and at the same time ensure that the
momentum of growth was maintained. Explaining this further, he stated that
the priorities of the NCMP required enhanced funding for programmes like
Mid Day Meals, Sarvashiksha Abhiyan, rural roads, elementary education and
the employment guarantee programme.  He pointed out that the bulk of the
expenditure being undertaken on the education, health, etc., was on the
revenue side and not capital expenditure. The implementation of
recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission also meant that the
Government would have to take a hit on the receipts. There would be a
burden on the fisc to the extent of Rs. 26,000 crore or 0.75 per cent of the
GDP on account of the implementation of the Twelfth Finance Commission’s
recommendations.
While explaining the constraints on the revenue augmentation front, the
Finance Minister stated that under the Constitution, agriculture cannot be
taxed by the Union Government; with the current thrust on globalisation, both,
customs and excise duties had to be brought down to be rationalised; there
was little flexibility available on the personal income tax and there were limitsto increasing corporate tax to maintain the significant momentum for growth
and business confidence. In these circumstances, the Government could
meet the fiscal deficit target to a large though not full extent and had to take a
pause on the revenue deficit. The Government would however strive to
borrow less than budgeted as would be the case this year.
 The Finance Minister conveyed that the Government attached the highest
importance to maintaining price stability. He recognised the challenges posed
in managing appropriate monetary environment in the face of strong capital
inflows and emphasized the equal importance of maintaining price stability
and accelerating growth momentum. The FM looked forward to a year of
growth, low inflation and a benign interest rate scenario. In this context, he
expected banks to become more competitive and efficient and thus lower their
spreads which were still high. The Reserve Bank and the Government of India
will continue to work together to maintain price stability and benign interest
rate environment and to ensure adequate credit flows to agriculture and other
productive sectors.
The Directors of the RBI Board were unanimous in their view that the budget
is pro-growth while placing added importance on social sectors. They noted
the positive response globally received for the major thrust of the budget.
While welcoming the initiatives taken in regard to rural credit in particular, they
desired greater thrust on appropriate interest rate environment ,risk mitigation,
warehouse receipt facilities et cetera in the context of their relevance to large
rural population.
The Directors of the Board complimented the FM for his unique emphasis on
outcomes rather than outlays.  In this regard, suggestions included increasing
capital expenditure on health sector, assessing all types of government
expenditure, investments and subsidies to determine the programmes that
were most useful, better capacity utilisation of existing projects and improving
productivity in capital expenditure.
Welcoming various initiatives, the Directors particularly appreciated the FM’s
concern for preventing tax evasion and suggested consideration of various
measures to encourage cheque habit and widen the tax base.  Members
urged the FM to simplify tax administration and implementation by making it
less discretionary.
The Governor expressed satisfaction that growth is higher & inflation is lower
than expected in the current year and hoped for a similar outcome next year
also unless there were totally unexpected developments. The Governor
specifically mentioned Budget announcements relating to proposed
amendments to the Banking Regulations Act and the Reserve Bank of India
Act and stated that these would provide the basis for the next stage of
banking sector reforms.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Governor informed the Finance Minister
and its Members of the Board that RBI would be completing 70 years by theend of this month.  Considering this fact he had invited Shri Satya Paul
Virmani who was a Director on the RBI Board in 1937 to meet with them.
Rupambara Padhi
Information Officer
Press Release : 2004-2005/932