PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 24, 2005
Issue of Rs.50 denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series
with additional/new security features without inset letter in numbering
panel bearing the signature of Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs.50 denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series without inset letter in numbering panel bearing the signature of
Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor. The new series 2005 banknotes will be of the same size and
there is no change in the colour/design/images of the banknotes both at the obverse
(front) and the reverse (back). All the security features have been mentioned in the
earlier Press Release dated August 10, 2005, and the salient additional/new security
features of the Rs.50 banknotes are as under :
Obverse (front)
Security Thread: The new series 2005 banknotes in Rs.50 denomination will have
machine readable windowed demetalised clear text magnetic 1.4 mm wide security
thread with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and "RBI". The thread will fluoresce in yellow on both
sides under ultraviolet light. The thread will be visible as a continuous line from behind
when held up against light.
See-through Register: The floral design printed both on the front  (hollow) and back
(filled up) of the Rs.50 banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the watermark
window will have the denominational numeral 50. Half of the numeral is printed on the
obverse (front) and half on the reverse (back). Both the printed portions have an
accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when viewed
against light.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 50 appears alongside Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the
watermark window.
Omron anti-photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles on either side of the legend "ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¢£{¸¨¸Ä ¤¸ÿˆÅ" and  'Reserve Bank of India'.
Intaglio print: The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal, guarantee and
promise clause, Ashoka Pillar emblem on the left, RBI Governor's signature, and
identification mark for the visually impaired are printed in intaglio, i.e., in raised prints
(felt by touch) and have been made more prominent by raising the depth.
Reverse (back)
Year of printing : Year of printing will appear on the reverse of the Rs.50 banknote.
Omron anti-photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles in the right hand margin of the Rs.50 banknote.
All banknotes in the denomination of Rs.50 issued by the Reserve Bank in the
past will continue to be legal tender.
   G. Raghuraj
Press Release: 2005-2006/245       Deputy General Manager