PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 2, 2005
RBI releases Draft Report of the Internal Group
on Rural Credit and Micro Finance
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today released the Report of the Internal Group on
Rural Credit and Micro Finance.  The Group was set up to examine the issue of allowing
banks to adopt the "agency" model by using the Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and
other external entities for providing credit support to the rural and farm sectors, study the
feasibility and modalities of appointment of "Banking Correspondents" to function as
intermediaries between the lending banks and the beneficiaries, suggest steps to promote
Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) and examine the extent of regulation, if need be, of MFIs.
It may be recalled that the Hon'ble Finance Minister in his statement on Union
Budget - 2005-06 had suggested that the RBI should examine the above issues so that the
banks would give more focus to provide credit to the rural and farm households through
innovative measures and  promote and empower MFIs so that they can intermediate
between the lending banks and the beneficiaries.  Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Governor, RBI, in his
Annual Policy Statement - 2005-06 had also stressed the need for the banks to review
their existing practices so as to align them with the objectives of financial inclusion.
The Group examined various policy options and strategies for enlarging the
outreach of the banks through wide consultations with various stake holders and also
reviewed the recommendations made by various committees on regulation of the micro
finance sector.  To deepen and widen the financial services provided by banks particularly
to the under-serviced areas and the rural poor, the Group has suggested two Models, viz.
the Business Facilitator Model and the Business Correspondent Model for providing non-
financial support services and financial services as "pass through" agents respectively by
leveraging MFIs/NGOs, Civil Society Organisations and other external entities.  The Group
has also made recommendations relating to promotion, development and rating of MFIs
and other outreach entities and mechanisms including widespread use of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) for expansion of banking outreach in a convenient,
secured and cost effective manner.  In relation to the regulation of MFIs, the Group has
noted that  the major players undertaking micro finance activities are well regulated entities
like banks and NBFCs and the models of Business Facilitators/ Correspondents suggested
by the Group would forge stronger linkage between the NGOs-MFIs and the banks under a
framework of due diligence and rating. As such, most part of micro finance port-folio will
remain under the banks and the NBFCs, which come under the regulatory framework of
RBI. Hence, a separate and exclusive regulatory framework for MFIs may not be required
for the present.
The draft report of the Group is available on the RBI's website (www.rbi.org.in).
Views/ comments may be sent to cgmincrpcd@rbi.org.in or gsrinivasan@rbi.org.in or may
be faxed to 022-2265 8276/ 022-2265 8273 by July 02, 2005.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1266