`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 3, 2005
RBI releases Vision Document for Payment and Settlement Systems
                                                                        
The Reserve Bank of India today released the Vision Document for
Payment and Settlement Systems. The document lists the accomplishments in
the area of payment system during the last three years and gives a roadmap for
its further advancement during the next three years.
Safety, security, soundness and efficiency have been identified in the
document as the key themes of the payment systems upgradation efforts.
Whereas safety in payment and settlement systems relates to risk reduction
measures, security pertains to confidence in the integrity of the payment
systems.  All payment systems are envisaged to be on sound footing with
adequate legal backing for operational procedures and transparency norms.
Efficiency enhancements are envisaged by leveraging the benefits of technology
for cost effective solutions.
The document also details the action points for upgradation of the payment
systems with definite milestones during next three years.  During the first year,
i.e., 2005-06, focus would be on setting up of a new institution for all retail
payment systems and operationalising a National Settlement System (NSS).  The
new institution would be a limited company, owned and operated by banks and
would act as an umbrella organisation for all retail clearing operations - both
paper based and electronic.  Apart from starting robust technology intensive
electronic credit system (ECS) and electronics funds transfer (EFT) facility, the
proposed institution would take initiatives on converting existing MICR clearing to
cheque truncation based clearing.  ATM switching, multi application smart card,
e-commerce and m-commerce would be other activities of the new institution.
The proposed NSS system would facilitate centralised settlement of all clearing
transactions at one place so that banks can pool their balances and manage their
liquidity optimally.  To start with, all clearing settlements at the four metropolitan
centres (i.e., Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai) would be settled under NSS
system by December 2005.
Expanding the reach of the RTGS and electronic payment products would
also receive priority.  The Reserve Bank has envisaged that EFT products with a
combination of its variants (RTGS, EFT, Special-EFT, National-EFT, National
EFT (Extended)) would be available at about 10,000 bank branches at 500
centres by March 2006. Cheque Truncation Project would be launched at
National Capital Region by March 2006 and extended to other three metro
centres (Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai) during the next two years.
The Vision Document emphasises creation of a sound legal base by way of
Payment System Act and regulations made under the bill.  Making all large value
payment systems like RTGS, Government Securities Clearing (G-Sec Clearing),
FOREX Clearing and High Value Clearing compliant with Core Principles ofSystemically Important Payment Systems (SIPS) has been indicated as another
important objective. Creating a sound legal base will form a part of this
compliance initiative. The Vision Document also indicates that MICR clearing
would be introduced at 14 centres (in addition to 40 existing centres) by March
2007.
As regards customer facilitation and protection, it is envisaged that all
payment system service providers would set up Customer Facilitation Centres
(CFC) and would put in place appropriate compensation policy and procedures
for any deficiency in services.
It may be recalled that Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India,
had, in the recently announced Annual Policy Statement, announced that the
Reserve Bank will release a vision document for Payment and Settlement
System.
    Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1144