PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 21, 2005
NEFT System goes live
 
The National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) started live operations
from Today. The objective of the NEFT system is to establish an Electronic
Funds Transfer system to facilitate an efficient, secure, economical, reliable
and expeditious system of funds transfer between banks in the banking sector
using Structured Financial Messaging Solution (SFMS) backbone.
For the time being there will be a single settlement per day at 12.00
noon. To begin with 8 banks will be participating in the live run. Subsequently
other banks will join the System in a phased manner. Depending on their full
technical and other preparedness, eligible participants will join the System at
regular interval. It is expected that all the banks participating in Special
Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT) will be joining NEFT by December 2005. In
the initial phase NEFT will replace the SEFT System. It is envisaged that in
future NEFT will replace the EFT System and NEFT will be the major clearing
system for all retail payments.
It may be recalled that as a part of payment system reforms, the
Reserve Bank of India had initiated several measures to reduce risks,
especially settlement and systemic risks, in payment systems. NEFT is an
initiative in that direction.
In the NEFT System remittance transactions move electronically from
end to end using Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)-based security procedure
compared to EFT system where transmission of remittance transactions is not
necessarily electronic from end to end. Therefore, NEFT covers only the
networked branches anywhere in the country while EFT system covers all
branches at 15 identified centres. The Reserve Bank of India plans to migrate
fully to NEFT System when optimum number of branches at the 15 centres
get NEFT-enabled.
The eight banks participating in the first phase are : Canara Bank, Bank
of Baroda, Punjab National Bank, Dena Bank, ABN AMRO Bank, HSBC, ICICI
Bank and HDFC Bank.
        G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/615
 