PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 4, 2005
RBI places Vision Document in Public Domain for Feedback
The Reserve Bank of India today placed on its website a draft Vision
Document for Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) and requested for feedback.
The feedback could be sent directly to the Chief General Manager - in -
Charge, RBI, Urban Banks Department, Garment House, Worli, Mumbai -
400018 or emailed to rbiubdco@rbi.org.in or faxed to 022-24974030.
It may be recalled that the Governor, Reserve Bank of India had, in the
Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy Statement for 2004-05, announced that a
Vision Document for the future role of urban cooperative banks was being
evolved to ensure depositors’ interest and avoid contagion while providing
useful service to local communities. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank prepared
a discussion paper on the Vision Document and placed it before the Standing
Advisory Committee for Urban Cooperative Banks in December 2004. Based
on the discussions at the meeting, a committee comprising representatives
from the Reserve Bank, Federations of Urban Cooperative Banks and
Registrars of Co-operative Societies of States was constituted to work out the
details and prepare a revised draft of the Vision Document. The committee
submitted its report to the Reserve Bank on December 31, 2004. The report of
the committee was examined and a draft Vision Document has been prepared
taking into consideration the regulatory and supervisory requirements.
As per the document the UCBs have to emerge as a sound and healthy
network of jointly owned, democratically controlled, and ethically managed
banking institutions providing need based quality banking services, essentially
to the middle and lower middle classes and marginalised sections of the
society.
The broad objectives of the Vision Document are:
(i) To rationalise the existing regulatory and supervisory approach
keeping in view the heterogeneous character of entities in the
sector;
(ii) To facilitate a focused and continuous system of supervision
through enhanced use of technology;
(iii) To enhance professionalism and improve the quality of governance
in UCBs by providing training for skill up-gradation as also by
including large depositors in the decision making process/
management of banks;
(iv) To put in place a mechanism that would address the problems of
dual control, given the present legal framework;(v) To put in place a consultative arrangement for identifying weak but
potentially viable entities in the sector and provide a framework for
their being nurtured back to health including, if necessary, through a
process of consolidation; and
(vi) To identify the unviable entities in the sector and provide an exit
path for such entities.
The Vision Document envisages differential treatment for regulation
and supervision of unit banks (i.e. one branch bank) that have deposits of less
than Rs. 50 crore and all other banks with deposits of over Rs. 50 crore.
According to the Document, the cooperative banks with deposits of over
Rs. 50 crore would be treated on par with a commercial bank for the purpose
of regulation and supervision subject to the existing relaxations in force. The
unit banks having deposits of less than Rs. 50 crore would be subjected to
simpler regulatory and supervisory requirements. In particular, they are
proposed to be given an additional time of three years to classify non
performing assets based on 90 day delinquency norm. However, they would
be required to build adequate provisions during this period to transit to the 90
day norm at the end of three years.
Recognising the need for State specific approach, the Document also
proposes setting up of a State level Task Force on Co-operative Urban Banks
(TAFCUB) comprising representatives of the Reserve Bank, the State
government and the Sector in each of the five states with high concentration
of UCBs, viz., Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and
Tamilnadu as also in a few other states having, say, more than 50 banks to
explore viable state specific solutions, including, on the future set up of the
existing unlicensed banks whose license applications are pending with the
Reserve Bank. The Document further suggests signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding between the Reserve Bank and the State Governments to
ensure that the difficulties caused by dual control are suitably addressed.
The Document also envisages that every authority concerned with co-
operative sector would play its part in ensuring that the aspirations of the
Urban Co-operative Banking sector are nurtured in a manner that depositor
interest and the public interest at large were protected.
P. V. Sadanandan
         Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/928