PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 27, 2005
Government of Andhra Pradesh signs
 MOU with Reserve Bank of India
The Government of Andhra Pradesh and the Reserve Bank of India have
today signed a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to urban cooperative
banks in the state of Andhra Pradesh. Consequent upon this, a state level Task
Force on Urban Cooperative Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for Andhra
Pradesh. Shri R. Gandhi, Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for the state of
Andhra Pradesh is the Chairman of the TAFCUB and Dr. C. Uma Malleswara Rao,
Registrar of Cooperative Societies, Andhra Pradesh its co-chairman.  The other
members of the TAFCUB are: a nominee of the State Government of Andhra
Pradesh, Shri K.P.V. Karunakaran, General Manager, Urban Banks Department,
Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai, Shri D. Krishna, Chief Executive
Officer, National Federation of Urban Banks (NAFCUB), New Delhi, and Shri G.
Ramamurthy, Chairman, AP State Urban Banks Federation, Hyderabad.  The first
meeting of the TAFCUB will be held soon.
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing
the training, computerisation needs of the urban cooperative banks in the state of
Andhra Pradesh with the objective of upgrading their human resources skills and
technological infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and
quality of management information systems.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-term Review of Annual Policy announced in
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a vision document for urban
cooperative banks would be prepared.  Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in
public domain a draft vision document in March 2005.  Based on the responses
received, the vision document is being finalised.
As the urban cooperative banks are subject to dual control by the Reserve
Bank and state governments, the vision document envisaged the signing of
Memorandum of Understanding between State Governments and the Reserve Bank
of India to put in place an arrangement through which there is a convergence on the
approach and remedial actions required to be taken for facilitating the development
of the sector. The vision document also proposed the constitution of a State Level
Task Force of Urban Cooperative Banks, under the chairmanship of Regional
Director of the Reserve Bank for the concerned state with Registrar of Cooperative
Societies as the co-chairman and representatives from the State and the National
Federation for Urban Cooperative Banks (NAFCUB) among others, as its members,
for the purpose of identifying the potentially viable urban cooperative banks and
drawing up a time bound action plan for their revival by setting specific monitorable
milestones.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1371