`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 10, 2005
RBI constitutes Board for Regulation and Supervision of
Payment and Settlement Systems
In the recent period, the Reserve Bank of India has taken a number of steps
to strengthen the institutional framework for the payment and settlement systems,
which are crucial components of the financial system. Carrying forward building of
this institutional framework, the Reserve Bank has today constituted a Board for
Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) as a
Committee of its Central Board, as per the Reserve Bank of India (Board for
Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems) Regulations,
2005 which were notified in the Gazette of India dated February 18, 2005.
The BPSS has been constituted with the following members:
1. Governor Chairman
2. Shri V Leeladhar Dy Governor Vice Chairman
3. Smt K J Udeshi, Dy Governor Member
4. Smt S Gopinath Dy Governor Member
5. Shri H P Ranina Central Board Member Member
6. Shri N R Narayanamurthy Central Board Member Member
The Executive Directors in charge of the functions relating to payment
systems and financial markets and the Principal Legal Advisor are permanent
invitees to BPSS. In addition, Shri P S Shenoy, who has recently demitted office
as the Chairman and Managing Director of Bank of Baroda and has vast
experience in the filed of payment systems, will also be a permanent invitee.
The BPSS comes into effect from today and will have tenure of two years.
The BPSS will prescribe policies relating to the regulation and supervision
of all types of payment and settlement systems, set standards for existing and
future systems, authorise the payment and settlement systems, determine criteria
for membership to these systems, including continuation, termination and
rejection of membership.
The National Payments Council (NPC) set up in 1999 will continue to exist
as an advisory body to BPSS.
In order to assist BPSS in performing its functions, the Reserve Bank has
also constituted a new department, the Department of Payment and Settlement
Systems (DPSS).
     Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/945