PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
                                                                                          August 29, 2005
RBI Annual Report 2004-05: Highlights
The Reserve Bank of India released its Annual Report for 2004-05.  Some
highlights:
ASSESSMENT OF 2004-05
Overall Performance
A distinct dynamism exhibited by the manufacturing sector underpinned a
strong and well-distributed industrial recovery that contributed to acceleration in
overall economic activity, infusing business confidence, export competitiveness
and a pick-up in investment intentions. The improvement in rabi production
helped in shoring up kharif output losses and imparting resilience to Indian
agriculture. Against the backdrop of the growth peak in 2003-04, India’s
macroeconomic performance in 2004-05 was heartening in the face of threats to
growth from an unsatisfactory monsoon and upside risks to stability from high
and volatile international crude oil prices. In conjunction with the sustained
buoyancy of the services sector, these impulses of growth mitigated, to a large
extent, the setback to agriculture. Accordingly, the Indian economy remained
among the growth drivers of the global economy, which exhibited high overall
growth despite various uncertainties and risks. Coordinated and carefully
calibrated monetary and fiscal policies, deployed to address the spike in
inflation during May-August, 2004 were successful in containing inflation to its
desired trajectory in the last quarter of the year. Nevertheless, pressures from
international crude prices as well as from the burgeoning domestic demand
spilled over into the balance of payments, leading to strong import growth and a
widening trade deficit signalling, to some extent, better absorption as well as
resilience in the economy. Understandably, after recording surpluses for three
years, the current account exhibited a deficit. Net capital flows were higher than
those recorded in the previous year, partly reflecting global trends and partly
drawn by the underlying strength of the macroeconomic fundamentals and
outlook, the robust performance of the corporate sector and the attractive
valuations of Indian financial markets. At the end of 2004-05, India’s foreign
exchange reserves were US $ 141.5 billion, surpassing the level of India’s
external debt.
Monetary Developments
A noteworthy aspect of macroeconomic management during 2004-05 was
the success in restraining inflation and inflationary expectations in an
environment of severe supply shocks emanating from a sharp rise in
international crude oil prices and the setback to agricultural production caused
by a deficient monsoon. Inflation, measured by movements in wholesale prices,
reached its intra-year peak of 8.7 per cent by end-August 2004 before
moderating to 5.1 per cent by end-March 2005 in response to calibrated policy
measures. The policy response included fiscal measures in the form of cuts inexcise and customs duties and monetary measures to withdraw excess
liquidity from the financial markets.
While persevering with its objective of provision of liquidity to meet credit
growth and support investment and export demand in the economy, monetary
policy assigned relatively greater weight to price stability by switching from ‘a
very close watch on the movements in the price level’ in the Annual Policy
Statement (May 2004) to ‘equal emphasis on price stability’ in its Mid-term
Review (October 2004). This was supported by a 50 basis points increase in the
cash reserve ratio (CRR) in September-October 2004 and a 25 basis points hike
in the reverse repo rate in October 2004. With a view to managing liquidity
pressures emanating from large and persistent capital flows, sterilisation
operations were undertaken through the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS)
supported by the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF). These operations were
successful in keeping monetary conditions stable and well within their indicative
trajectories set out in the Annual Policy Statement for 2004-05.
Financial markets in India remained broadly stable during 2004-05,
notwithstanding the uncertainty associated with the upturn in the global interest
rate cycle and growing global macroeconomic imbalances. The introduction of
the MSS, effective April 2004, provided the Reserve Bank with greater flexibility
to absorb liquidity of a relatively durable nature and to modulate liquidity
conditions in the financial markets, consistent with monetary and financial
stability objectives.
Financial Stability
The conduct of financial regulation and supervision in 2004-05 continued
to be guided by the objective of maintaining confidence in the financial system
by enhancing its soundness and efficiency. In addition to fine-tuning the
prudential guidelines, the Reserve Bank focused on encouraging market
discipline and ensuring good governance with an emphasis on “fit and proper”
owners and diversified ownership. Steps to implement Basel II norms were
carried forward through the Capital Adequacy Assessment Process. The
Reserve Bank stressed financial inclusion by emphasising the facilitation of
transactions by the common person and strengthening of the credit delivery
systems as a response to the pressing needs of society and the economy.
OUTLOOK FOR 2005-06
GDP Growth
Leading indicators and available information for 2005-06 suggest that the
Indian economy is poised to build upon the gains in macroeconomic
performance secured in 2004-05. The revival of the South-West monsoon,
robust strengthening of manufacturing activity, high corporate profitability,
buoyant equity markets, robust merchandise exports and imports, sustained
demand for non-food credit and lead indicators of services sector activity all
point to a brightening of the near term prospects of the Indian economy.
Assuming a normal monsoon, and on the expectations that the industry
and the services sectors would maintain their current growth momentum while
absorbing the impact of oil prices, the Reserve Bank in its Annual Policy
Statement for 2005-06 (April 2005) indicated that real GDP growth for 2005-06
could be placed around 7.0 per cent for the purpose of monetary policy
formulation. This was reaffirmed in the First Quarter Review of the Annual
Statement on Monetary Policy (July 2005).Price Situation
Although headline inflation edged up during April 2005 driven up by prices
of fruits and vegetables and some freely-priced items in the fuel group, it eased
in the subsequent months despite hikes in the prices of electricity and petrol and
diesel. Annual WPI inflation rate was 3.4 per cent as on August 6, 2005, down
from 5.1 per cent at end-March 2005. More than one-half of the annual inflation
was on account of the fuel group, even as the pass-through from high
international crude oil prices has remained incomplete. Excluding the fuel group,
annual inflation was 1.8 per cent as on August 6, 2005, significantly lower than
headline inflation. During 2005-06 so far, oil prices in the international markets
continue to remain high and volatile. The average price for a basket of major
international crude varieties (Brent, WTI and Dubai Fateh) at around US $ 52.2
per barrel during April-July 2005 was 13.1 per cent higher than in January-
March 2005 and 44.1 per cent over the corresponding period of last year.  With
the latest hike in prices effective June 20, 2005, the average domestic price of
petrol and diesel (in four metros) has increased by 6.2 per cent over the end-
March 2005 level and 22.4 per cent over the level a year ago. The pass-through
of crude prices continues to remain the most critical factor influencing domestic
inflation.
The Reserve Bank sought to moderate inflationary expectations by a
demonstrable commitment to price stability through successive increases of 25
basis points each in the reverse repo rate in October 2004 and April 2005. On
balance, underlying inflationary pressures appear to have been contained during
2005-06 so far and the inflation outcome, under normal circumstances, as noted
in the First Quarter Review of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy (July
2005), is expected to be consistent with the Annual Policy Statement’s projection
for annual point-to-point inflation for 2005-06 in the range of 5.0-5.5 per cent.
Monetary Management
Despite the strong surge in demand for bank credit, monetary conditions
have remained easy during 2005-06 so far (up to August 19, 2005) reflecting
liquidity management operations by the Reserve Bank. Responding to a
widening of the trade deficit, a marked increase in the demand for bank credit
from the commercial sector and the onset of the Government borrowing
programme, the Reserve Bank injected primary liquidity into the system. The
commercial sector’s demand for bank credit remained strong, with year-on-year
non-food credit growth of scheduled commercial banks reaching 30.2 per cent
as on August 5, 2005 on top of 24.4 per cent a year ago.
Given the volatility in the inflation rate during 2004-05, there is a need to
consolidate the gains obtained in recent years from reining in inflationary
expectations. While sustained efforts over time have helped to build confidence
in price stability, inflationary expectations can turn adverse in a relatively short
time if noticeable adverse movements in prices take place.  Credible
commitment of policy to fight inflation is critical to stop translation of higher oil
prices into wage-price spirals. In addition, the international prices of non-oil
primary commodities may continue to remain firm. On the domestic front, the
manoeuvrability on oil prices is getting limited and corporates have a higher
probability of gaining their pricing power with a better industrial outlook. The
pricing pressure, if it were to occur from the supply side, could get complicated
by continuing overhang of excess domestic liquidity. While the economy has the
resilience to withstand supply shocks, the upside risks do exist.  As such, the
inflationary situation needs to be watched closely to persevere in maintaininginflation expectations and any complacency on this count could have
adverse consequences for both stability and growth.
Real Sector
Agriculture
The experience of 2004-05 brings to the fore, yet again, the rain
dependence of Indian agriculture. In this context, imparting stability to farm
incomes assumes critical significance. Globalisation, rising incomes and
urbanisation have brought into focus the need for increasing diversification and
value addition in Indian agriculture. The new demand patterns as well as the
shifts in consumption warrant a shift of land and other resources to crops with
higher potential for value addition. India has considerable export potential in
areas such as dairying, sericulture, floriculture and horticulture. This segment,
besides enhancing nutritional and livelihood standards, sustains a large number
of agro-industries which hold rich potential for non-farm employment.
Industry
The congenial policy regime in regard to mergers and acquisitions
including the liberalisation of policies in regard to direct investment abroad has
encouraged consolidation of Indian industry and enabled the reaping of the
benefits of economies of scale. This has imparted a high degree of
competitiveness to Indian industry. In view of the enhanced external as well as
internal competition, further consolidation through scale economies is likely to
remain an important driver of industrial growth in the future.  It is, therefore,
critical that the current upsurge in industry is nurtured in order for India to
realise its growth potential. In this context, there are a host of infrastructural bottlenecks
which could impinge upon competitiveness and the supply elasticities to meet the emerging
global and domestic demand.
Having recognised the fact that the Indian economy is among the more inefficient
users of energy, highest and urgent priority needs to be given for energy-saving measures,
which could include appropriate pricing policies and incentives to invest. In this context,
there is a need for a greater degree of pass-through of higher international crude oil prices
to domestic prices. This will also enable more efficient use of oil in the economy, especially
in view of the fact that the rise in international oil prices appears to have a large permanent
component.
With growing urbanisation, issues related to urban infrastructure have
come to the forefront. At present, investment in urban infrastructure is hampered
by the fact that local governments are not yet creditworthy and urban
infrastructure projects are, therefore, not found to be commercially viable.
Strengthened planning and better coordination between various agencies
entrusted with maintenance of urban infrastructure would have a positive impact
on the overall productivity of economic activity in cities. Given the fact that there
is a heavy concentration of economic activity in large cities, weak infrastructural
facilities impede the growth of large cities. It is, therefore, of utmost importance
that the quality of urban infrastructure in the large cities is improved significantly
so as to maintain and accelerate the momentum of economic growth and
productivity enhancement.
Services
The services sector remains the growth driver of the economy, with a
contribution of more than 57 per cent of GDP. The services sector is expected to
benefit from the ongoing liberalisation of the foreign investment regime into the
sector. Software and the ITES-BPO sectors have recorded an exponential
growth in recent years. The continued buoyancy in this sector is sustainable inthe medium term in view of enabling policy developments, encouraging
investment climate, improvement in business expectations, affordable labour
force, talented technological manpower, time zone advantages, improved
telecommunication facilities and above all, a low cost destination for
outsourcing. India’s strengths in legal and contractual obligations, apart from a
large scientific and technological talent pool, need to be effectively explored.
The ITES sector is labour intensive and holds promises of higher employment.
To improve international confidence and realise the full potential of the software
and services sector, added emphasis may be warranted in regard to
infrastructure as well as in the implementation of strong security solutions.
Fiscal Policy
Consolidation of Central Government finances so as to achieve the targets
set under the FRBM by 2008-09 is the goal of fiscal policy, notwithstanding the
‘pause’ that has been set during 2005-06. Since 2002-03, Central Government
finances have recorded a progressive reduction in key deficit indicators. Against
this backdrop, with the GFD/GDP ratio at 4.1 per cent in 2004-05 (provisional
accounts), the FRBM target of 3.0 per cent by 2008-09 appears to be within
striking distance. However, with the revenue deficit at 2.6 per cent in 2004-05,
the elimination of the revenue deficit by 2008-09 will prove to be more difficult.
Achieving this target requires continued focused action on containing
expenditures, increase in tax revenues and reduction in tax exemptions.
External Sector
Various reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurial
energies, stepped up productivity gains and improved competitiveness and
access to overseas markets. India’s merchandise exports have been rising at a
rate of over 20 per cent per annum, in US dollar terms, during 2002-05. These
positive developments in the external sector provide the environment of
pursuing a further rationalisation of tariffs with a view towards moving to a
single, uniform rate on imports, say 10 per cent, and simplifying all customs
procedures strictly in line with best global practices. This should help to improve
competition, exports and domestic consumers. The current external
environment, including the level of the foreign exchange reserves, enables such
a move to be made with little or no downside risks.
The optimism generated by the recent gains in macroeconomic
performance warrants a balanced consideration of further financial liberalisation.
At this stage, the optimism generated by impressive macroeconomic
performance accompanied with stability has given rise to pressures for
significantly accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is
essential to take into account the risks associated with it while resetting an
accelerated pace of a gradualist approach. The recent experience in many
countries shows that periods of impressive macroeconomic performance
generate pressures for speedier financial liberalisation since everyone appears
to be a gainer from further liberalisation, but the costs of instability that may be
generated in the process are borne by the country, the government and the
poorer sections. Avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The
approach to managing the external sector, the choice of instruments and the
timing and sequencing of policies are matters of informed judgment, given the
imponderables.
Financial Sector
With increasing financial sector liberalisation and emergence of financial
conglomerates, financial sector stability has emerged as a key objective of theReserve Bank. In this context, the recent emphasis in the regulatory
framework in India on ensuring good governance through “fit and proper”
owners, directors and senior managers of the banks infuses a qualitative
dimension to the conventional discharge of financial regulation through
prescribing prudential norms and encouraging market discipline. Commercial
banks in India will start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007.
Implementation of Basel II will initially require more capital for banks in India in view of the
fact that operational risk is not captured under Basel I, and the capital charge for market
risk was not prescribed until recently. Consequently, banks are exploring all avenues for
meeting the capital requirements under Basel II.
Monetary Policy
The recent trends in credit demand are encouraging although there is a
recognition of a greater need to ensure credit quality. It is important that the
sharp increase in credit flow to the rural sector witnessed during the past two
years is maintained while reducing intermediation cost so that borrowing costs
also come down. The thrust of the current strategy adopted by the Reserve Bank
to increase the flow of rural credit is on enhancing credit delivery in a regime of
reasonable credit prices within the existing legal and institutional constraints.
The conduct of monetary policy is getting increasingly sophisticated and
forward looking, warranting a continuous upgradation of monitoring scan and
technical skills. Flexibility and timeliness in policy response coupled with
transparency and accountability hold the key to further enhancing credibility.
Above all, the monetary authority has to address dilemmas which exert
conflicting pulls at every stage.  These issues have come to the fore in the
conduct of monetary policy by the Reserve Bank in recent years. The Reserve
Bank will continue to take necessary measures in response to the evolving
situation to meet its price stability objective while maintaining financial stability
and ensuring appropriate liquidity to meet credit growth and support investment
and export demand in the economy.
It is clear that prospects for economic growth are strong, while inflation
has been contained so far. Maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability in
an environment of sustained high growth of the economy in the future would,
however, depend critically on policies relating to oil prices, diversification of
agriculture, improvement in urban infrastructure, determined measures for fiscal
consolidation and, above all, on the continuation of the positive investment
climate in the country.
G Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/ 261