October 9, 2005
RBI activates Relief Measures in J & K through Banks
          The Reserve Bank of India has today advised banks to liberally extend its
relief package for the State of Jammu & Kashmir, which has been hit by an
earthquake leading to destruction of life and property. Banks have also been
advised to provide financial assistance for the purpose of repairs/reconstruction
of dwelling units, etc., damaged on account of the earthquake.
In addition to these measures, banks have also been advised to increase
the limit of consumption loan to be provided to the affected persons in the state
up to Rs. 5,000 without any collateral. The limit may be enhanced to Rs. 10,000
at the discretion of the branch manager, depending on the repaying capacity of
the borrower. Further, the banks have been asked to expeditiously restore
banking services in the affected areas.
In a notification issued today, the Reserve Bank of India has directed bank
branches to initiate the package of measures immediately in terms of the its
standing guidelines on relief measures in areas affected by natural calamities,
and to provide financial assistance to the agriculturists, small scale industrial
units, artisans, small businesses and trading establishments affected by the
calamity. The measures include consumption loans to persons affected by
calamities for sustenance, waiver of margin requirements or considering as
margin the grants, subsidies provided by state governments, provision of credit
not only to existing borrowers but also to other eligible persons as also
conversion and rescheduling/restructuring of existing loans.  The package also
includes providing to affected persons term loans for developmental purposes.
Further, banks while using their discretion on charging of interest are required to
view such cases sympathetically and consider waiving of penal interest to be
charged for default of current dues and deferment of compounding of interest.
 The Reserve Bank has asked the convenor bank for the State of Jammu &
Kashmir to convene a Special State Level Bankers’ Committee meeting
immediately to discuss the situation and to consider and recommend any special
measures that might be required in the affected areas in addition to the Reserve
Bank's relief package. It has asked the convenor bank to also invite National
Housing Bank (NHB) and Small Industrial Development Bank of India (SIDBI) to
this meeting. The Reserve Bank has further advised NHB to consider provision offinancial assistance for the purpose of construction/repairs of dwelling units, etc.,
damaged by the earthquake.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-06/447