` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 4, 2005
RBI Releases Occasional Papers: Winter 2003
The Reserve Bank of India today released the Winter 2003 issue of its
Occasional Papers. The issue is woven around some important themes in central
banking which are at the forefront of discussion worldwide. It contains a rich fare of
articles, special notes and book reviews.
The Occasional Papers is the research journal of the Reserve Bank. It contains
contribution of the Reserve Bank's staff and reflect the views of the authors.
The first paper entitled “The Reserve Bank of India's Balance Sheet: Analytics
and Dynamics of Evolution” by Narendra Jadhav, Partha Ray, Dhritidyuti Bose and
Indranil Sen Gupta attempts to comprehensively analyse the evolution of the Reserve
Bank’s balance sheet covering the period from its inception in 1935 to 2004. The
analytical commentary of the evolution of the Reserve Bank of India balance sheet in
relation to the post-Independence national macroeconomic experience is partitioned
into three phases on the basis of shifts in the conduct of monetary policy. Interestingly,
structural breaks in the time path of the Reserve Bank’s rate of surplus transferred to
the Government are able to mirror these regime changes reasonably well.
 The second paper entitled “Non-Performing Loans and Terms of Credit of
Public Sector Banks in India: An Empirical Assessment” by Rajiv Ranjan and Sarat
Chandra Dhal explores an empirical approach to the analysis of commercial banks’
non-performing loans (NPLs) in the Indian context. The empirical results suggest that
terms of credit variables have significant effect on the banks’ non-performing loans in
the presence of bank size and macroeconomic shocks. In regard to terms of credit
variables, changes in cost of credit in terms of expectation of higher interest rate
induce increases in NPAs. On the other hand, factors like horizon of maturity of credit,
better credit culture, favorable macroeconomic and business conditions lead to
lowering of NPAs. Business cycle may have differential implications adducing to
differential response of borrowers and lenders.
The next paper entitled “Dynamics of Market Structure and Competitiveness of
the Banking Sector in India and its Impact on Output and Prices of Banking Services”
by Kaushik Bhattacharya and Abhiman Das examines the nature and the extent of
changes in market concentration in the Indian banking sector and their possible
implications on prices and outputs of banking services. The paper finds strong
evidence of change in market structure in banking in India. Interestingly, results reveal
that a major part of the change in market structure occurred during the early 1990s.
Despite a spate of mergers during the late 1990s, market concentration was not
significantly affected. It is also observed that different concentration ratios rank the
changes similarly over time. The paper argues that the favourable market structure in
India could be one important factor that led to a reduction in the 'prices' of banking
services after the administered interest regime was lifted.
The paper entitled “Allocative Efficiency of the Indian Banking System in the
Post- Reform Period: A State Level Analysis” by Biswa Swarup Misra examines2
introduction of financial sector reforms in the early 1990s. The analysis carried under
panel co integration framework reveals that overall allocative efficiency of the banking
system has improved in post reform period. This suggests the success of banking
sector reforms in improving allocative efficiency of the banking system in India. The
study also finds improvement in the overall allocative efficiency of the banking system
in the post reform period for the majority of the States. Further, the improved allocative
efficiency is more marked for the services sector than for industry across the States.
The fifth paper entitled “Derivatives and Volatility on Indian Stock Markets” by
Snehal Bandivadekar and Saurabh Ghosh studies the impact of introduction of index
futures on spot market volatility on both S&P CNX Nifty and BSE Sensex using
ARCH/GARCH technique. The empirical analysis points towards a decline in spot
market volatility after the introduction of index futures due to increased impact of
recent news and reduced effect or uncertainty originating from the old news. The
results using the surrogate indices like BSE 200 and Nifty Junior show that while the
‘futures effect’ plays a definite role in the reduction of volatility in the case of S&P CNX
Nifty; in the case of BSE Sensex, where derivative turnover is considerably low, its
role seems to be ambiguous.
Special Notes
In the section on special notes, the paper entitled “Changing Pattern of
Seasonality in Prices and Industrial Production in India” by Ajit R. Joshi and A.K.
Tripathi shows that overall seasonality has undergone a downward shift in almost all
the selected economic variables. This is an indication that the economy is becoming
less susceptible to the shocks during the year. Decreasing seasonal variations in
prices indicate better supply management. Seasonal patterns of industrial production
broadly reflect the busy and slack seasons. It is also observed that the seasonal
variations in one industry are transmitted to other related industries through supply
and demand channels. The pattern reflects the synergies across the industry groups.
The next paper in this section entitled  “Rural Income: Some Evidence of Effect
of Rural Credit During Last Three Decades” by Tapas Kumar Chakrabarty investigates
the dynamics of the rural income, primarily caused by the availability of funds. The
results indicate evidence towards the supply leading approach to rural finance. It is
advocated that let the market be encouraged gradually to allocate the rural finance,
banking upon the sound rural production base and rural finance.
The paper entitled “Inventory Investment Behaviour- Evidence from a Panel of
Indian Firms” by Seema Saggar augments production-smoothing specification with
cash flows and monetary policy variables in its application for the Indian data.
Evidence is presented in the paper to show that production smoothing is not a strong
motive behind inventory holdings for the Indian firms. While stock adjustment has a
large influence on inventories, a robust result of the analysis of inventory behaviour of
non-financial non-government public limited companies, is that cash flow is found to
be an important determinant as well. The publication is also available on our Website
www.rbi.org.in
                                                                                                          Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/817