PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
December 13, 2005.
RBI-SBI put in place
arrangements for smooth redemption of IMDs
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has put in place arrangements for
redemption of India Millennium Deposits (IMDs), in close co-ordination with
the State Bank of India (SBI). Appropriate preparations and arrangements
have been made to ensure that the redemption is done smoothly, in time and
without causing any impact on the money, government securities and foreign
exchange markets.
The IMDs for US$ 5.5 billion raised in the year 2000 from non-resident
Indians by SBI in US dollars, Pound Sterling and Euro, with the approval of
the Government of India (GoI) and RBI, are due for repayment on December
29, 2005. It is estimated that the redemption would entail foreign exchange
outgo of about US$ 7.3 billion (principal plus interest), which will be met
entirely by RBI by way of direct sale out of its foreign exchange reserves to
SBI at the prevailing  market  rate. The rupee consideration for this sale,
which is likely to be around  Rs.33,000 crore, will be paid by SBI.
The highlights of the arrangements are :
• The entire foreign exchange outgo of about US$ 7.3 billion will be met
by RBI by way of sale out of its foreign exchange reserves by way of
sale to SBI.
• SBI has taken adequate steps to mobilize rupee resources to purchase
foreign exchange from RBI.
• The exchange loss, if any, on account of depreciation of rupee would
be shared between SBI and GoI and accordingly, both the parties have
contributed their respective share in the exchange loss that has
accrued during certain years after the launch of IMDs. The
contributions received are held with RBI in the Maintenance of Value
(MoV) account.
• Going by the present liquidity conditions in the market, the system
should be in a position to take care of the redemption requirements.
The eligible market participants can take recourse to the Liquidity
Adjustment Facility(LAF) & Second Liquidity Adjustment Facility
(SLAF) of RBI for short-term residual mismatches in the rupee funds
position.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/ 717