RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 1, 2005
Compounding of Contravention under FEMA
The Government has, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India,
reviewed the procedures for compounding of contravention under Foreign Exchange
Management Act (FEMA). The procedures have been reviewed to provide comfort to
the citizens and corporate community by minimising transaction costs, while taking
severe view of wilful, malafide and fraudulent transactions . Accordingly, the
responsibilities of administering compounding of contravention cases under FEMA
have been vested with the Reserve Bank with exception of clause (a) of Section 3 of
FEMA 1999  which deals essentially with hawala transactions. The Directorate of
Enforcement would continue to deal with these cases.
Under FEMA, compounding of contravention allows the contravener to settle
an offence through imposition of a monetary penalty without going in for litigation
after the contravener acknowledges having committed the contravention.  
The Reserve Bank has since issued directions to the Authorised Dealers
operationalising the revised procedures for compounding of contravention under
FEMA. These procedures have been put on the RBI website ( www.rbi.org.in ). It
may be noted that once a contravention has been compounded by the Compounding
Authority, no proceeding or further proceeding will be initiated or continued, against
the contravener.
Process for Compounding
An application for compounding in prescribed form with necessary fee may be
submitted to the Compounding Authority (CA) either on being advised of a
contravention under FEMA or suo moto on becoming aware of the contravention.
The application may be made to the Compounding Authority, [Cell for Effective
implementation of FEMA (CEFA)], Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Exchange
th
Department, 11 Floor, Central Office Building, S. B. Singh Road, Fort,                
Mumbai- 400 001.
On receipt of the application for compounding of contravention committed
under FEMA 1999 (i.e. w.e.f. June 1, 2000), the compounding proceedings would be
initiated in accordance with the compounding rules. This process would be
concluded by the Compounding Authority within 180 days from the date of the
receipt of the application for compounding. The compounding order would be passed
after affording an opportunity to the contravener and all other concerned to be heard.
This procedure for compounding of contravention would be reviewed after six
months and consider modification as needed.
     Alpana Killawala
Press Release : 2004-2005/800 Chief General Manager