PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 22, 2005
RBI meets NBFC Representatives
Dr Y V Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, last week met the
Finance Industry Development Council (FIDC), a representative body of non-
banking finance companies (NBFCs). Deputy Governor Shri V Leeladhar,  Shri
A V Sardesai, Executive Director and other senior officials of the Reserve Bank
were also present. The objective of the meeting was to work out a three-year
perspective for the sector.
In his opening remarks, the Governor pointed out that the NBFCs were
an important component of the service sector which was a significant
contributor to the growth of the economy. It was important for the NBFCs to
efficiently intermediate and enhance credit delivery to the dispersed,
underbanked and underserviced sections of the economy. However, it was also
the Reserve Bank’s responsibility to protect the depositors’ interest. The
Governor clarified that while ensuring that the public deposit taking companies
and systemically important non-deposit taking companies were well regulated,
the Reserve Bank was looking at further strengthening the NBFC sector so as
to help the sector grow in terms of its asset base. He stressed the need for
further strengthening the NBFCs in this context and stated that the Reserve
Bank was looking at preparing a roadmap for NBFCs against this background
through a consultative process. The Governor further clarified that the Reserve
Bank had given an option to the NBFCs to voluntarily move out of public
deposits acceptance activity if they found the regulatory costs outweighed their
benefits. In case an NBFC voluntarily chose to get out of public deposits, the
Reserve Bank would, in fact, help the NBFC in its efforts, including imparting
training and technology support, he assured. He urged them to adopt
technological changes including on-line reporting by NBFCS.
The representatives of the NBFC sector appreciated the role of the
Reserve Bank in regulating the sector. They pointed out that the 1998
regulations had indeed helped weed out the non-serious players from the
market and had infused greater discipline in the sector. The representatives
averred that they had some inherent strengths of local knowledge, credit
appraisal skills, a well trained collection machinery, close monitoring of
borrowers and personalised attention to each client to cater to the needs of
small and medium enterprises in the rural and semi urban areas. As such, they
played a significant role in financing road transport and infrastructure. They
could also reach the grass root level through micro finance. The NBFCs should,
therefore, be viewed as complementing the banking sector and not as
competitive, they urged. The representatives further mentioned that for
regulations, they were on par with players, such as, banks, financial institutions
and housing finance companies and desired that they should have a level2
playing field with housing finance companies in matters such as, funding from
banks and access to from refinancing institutions such as SIDBI or NABARD.
NBFC representatives pointed out that easy access to bank finance as well as
refinance would also help reduce their dependence on public deposits. They
further urged that provisions of Debt Recovery Tribunal Act and the SARFAESI
Act available to banks and housing finance companies could be extended also
to NBFCs to protect their assets. Rationalising the number of regulations,
deposit insurance and rating of NBFCs were also discussed. Requesting for a
more frequent consultative meeting between FDIC and the Reserve Bank, the
representatives of NBFCs appealed that the Reserve Bank should play a
developmental role with regard to the growth of NBFC sector.
Alpana Killawala
      Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/989