PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 8, 2005
Be Proactive in providing Relief
to Tsunami Affected: RBI advisory to Banks
The Reserve Bank of India has issued an advisory to banks on being
proactive in providing relief to the Tsunami affected. It has, in the advisory, advised
banks that their branch managers should, on the basis of their experience and in
consultation with other agencies operating in the areas, identify the victims who are
in need of assistance and provide them necessary relief and that they need not wait
for any list of victims to be formally made available by any authority before providing
relief to the affected persons. This would include taking help of good NGOs working
in the areas to identify borrowers as also increase the limit of consumption loan to be
provided to the affected persons upto Rs 5,000 without any collateral. The limit may
be enhanced to Rs 10,000 at the discretion of the branch manager, depending on
the repaying capacity of the borrower.
Further, banks may allow opening of savings bank accounts with a nominal
balance of say, Rs 10, so that victims can receive relief cheques in their accounts. In
the case of loss of passbooks/ cheque books, fresh ones should be immediately
issued. The Reserve Bank has also advised banks to provide education loans to the
affected persons to enable them to purchase books, clothes, etc., for children
studying in educational institutions. As regards financing of defaulting fishermen and
other types of borrowers, banks have been asked to formulate a scheme on the lines
of the scheme for financing ‘farmers in arrears’ as announced by the Union Finance
Minister on June 18, 2004. The scheme for financing ‘farmers in arrears’ was
communicated to banks by the Indian Banks’ Association on July 7, 2004.
In addition, the Reserve Bank has permitted its staff in the affected states to
undertake relief work in the affected areas.
Tsunami Devastation: Relief measures by the banking system:
A Backgrounder
The Tsunami tidal waves struck the coastal areas in the states of Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala and Union Territories of Pondicherry and Andaman
and Nicobar Islands on December 26, 2004.
• On December 27, 2004, the Reserve Bank activated the relief package for
the states/ Union Territories affected by the Tsunami. Further, feedback was
obtained from the convenor banks of the State Level Bankers’ Committee
(SLBC) in these states/Union Territories. The Regional Directors of the
Reserve Bank at Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Thiruvananthapuram
were also advised to contact the concerned State Government and the
SLBC convenor bank and coordinate the relief efforts. A Task Force was
formed under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, Shri V. Leeladhar
to monitor the progress of relief and rehabilitation measures through banks
and to constantly review the situation to see if any further measures would
be required.• Special meetings of the SLBC were immediately convened in the three
states and the Union Territory of Pondicherry. Banks adopted special
measures to provide financial assistance to the persons, particularly under
fisheries, in the affected areas.
• Based on the suggestion received from a few SLBCs, the consumption loan
limit was enhanced from the existing Rs. 1000 to Rs. 3000 in the case of
persons affected by the Tsunami. The Regional Directors for the affected
states/Union Territories were also been advised to send a small team of
officials comprising the Lead District Officer and an official each from the
local Issue Department and Department of Banking Supervision to take
stock of the situation. The Reserve Bank’s Deputy Governor Shri V
Leeladhar, Executive Director Shri A V Sardesai and Chief General Manager
Shri G Srinivasan contacted some of the bank branches in the affected
areas over phone to get first hand knowledge of the ground situation.
• A circular dated December 29, 2004 was issued to all scheduled commercial
banks to receive donations to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund at all
branches and nominate a nodal branch at New Delhi for the purpose of
collection. To facilitate smooth transmission of funds to the Prime Minister’s
Relief Fund Account, the Reserve Bank nominated its Regional Director of
New Delhi as the coordinating officer. It also placed in public domain the
name, account number and MICR codes of the designated branches to
facilitate online remittance of donations by bank customers. Banks offering
online remittance services to its customers will permit remittance of
donations. All such services are to be provided free of charge.
• The Government of India exempted, with immediate effect and up to March
31, 2005, all associations (other than political parties), having a definite
cultural, economic, educational, religious or social programme from the
provisions of the Foreign Contributions (Regulation) Act, 1976 enabling them
to accept foreign contributions in cash and kind for providing relief to the
Tsunami victims, without obtaining formal approval from the Central
Government. This exemption is, however, subject to certain conditions. All
scheduled commercial banks have been advised to issue necessary
instructions to their branches in this regard.
• The National Housing Bank has formulated a concessional scheme for
financial assistance to banks and housing finance companies for providing
finance for construction/ repair/ renovation of houses.
• The National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development (NABARD) has
proposed to provide refinance at concessional rate to banks for financing the
affected persons. NABARD has also been requested to advise the banks
that the unit costs (presently being circulated among banks by NABARD) for
providing term loans for purchase of boats, fishing nets, etc., were only
indicative rates and as such, should be flexible and should be decided by
the banks depending on the local conditions.
                 P. V. Sadanandan
                       Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/725