PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 10, 2005
Banknotes 2005 – 06 Series
Security features of banknotes are changed and / or updated periodically with
the objective of staying ahead of the counterfeiters and to maintain confidence
of the public in the Indian banknotes. The existing security features were
reviewed and it has been decided to introduce banknotes with additional / new
security  features in a phased manner.  The banknotes with additional / new
security features will be issued in August, 2005, for Rs.50 and Rs.100
denominations followed by issuance of Rs.500 and Rs.1000 denominations
in September,  2005. Rs.10 and Rs.20 denomination banknotes with
additional / new security features will be issued in 2006.
The banknotes with additional / new security features will be of the same size
and there is no change in the images/design of the banknotes both at the
obverse and reverse.  While some of the security features of the existing
Mahatma Gandhi series have been retained, some have been modified and
few new security features have been added.
The banknotes currently in circulation will also continue to be legal tenders.
Security Features in new Rs 50 denomination banknotesLatent Image: On the obverse side of the banknote, a vertical band on the
right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait contains a latent image showing
the denominational value 50. The latent image is visible only when the
banknote is held horizontally at eye level.
Microlettering: This feature appears between the vertical band and the
Mahatma Gandhi portrait. It contains the word ‘RBI' and the denominational
value (50) in microletters. This feature can be seen better under a magnifying
glass.
Watermark: The watermark is a part of the CWBN paper and is visible by
holding the banknote against light. The new banknote contains the portrait of
Mahatma Gandhi with a light and shade effect and multi-directional lines.
Fluorescence: Number panels of the banknotes are printed in fluorescent
ink. The banknotes have optical fibres. Both can be seen when the banknotes
are seen under ultra-violet lamp.
Paper: Banknote is printed on a special watermarked paper with substrate
cotton and cotton rag. This gives the banknote a unique “feel” and crackling
sound. The new banknote has paper with increased grammage of 90 GSM
(±3) and caliper thickness of 110 microns (±5)
Security thread: The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma
Gandhi's portrait. The new banknotes have a machine readable windowed
demetalised clear text magnetic 1.4mm wide security thread with inscriptions ‘Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI. The thread fluoresces in yellow on both sides
under U.V.light. The thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when
held up against light.
Intaglio Printing: The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal,
Guarantee and Promise clause, Ashok Pillar Emblem on the left, RBI
Governor's signature on the obverse of the banknotes are printed in intaglio,
i.e.,  in raised prints, which  can be felt by touch. The new banknotes will have
raised intaglio printing with 130-micron depth in plate making stage.
Identification mark: A square in intaglio on the left of the watermark window
that helps the visually impaired to identify the denomination. To make the
intaglio effect more prominent, the engraving depth has been increased from
83 microns to 160 microns.
Dual coloured optical fibre:  The optical fibres will be of  dual colour and can
be seen when the banknotes are seen under ultra-violet lamp.See through Register:  The small floral design printed both on the front
(hollow) and back (filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band
next to the watermark window has been modified.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 50 appears vertically alongside Mahatma Gandhi
portrait in the watermark window.
Year of printing: Year of printing appears on the reverse of the banknote.Omron anti photocopying feature: A banknote with this feature, when
copied    by a colour photocopier, gives an output with a different colour
shade. The feature appears on either side of the legend Reserve Bank of
India on the obverse and in the left margin on the reverse.
Denomination numeral in see through Register:  The new see through
register is in the form of denominational numeral “ 50”. Half  of the numeral
printed on the front and half on the back. Both the printed portions have an
accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when
seen against the light.Security Features in new Rs.100 denomination banknotes
Latent Image: On the obverse side of the note, a vertical band on the right
side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait contains a latent image showing the
denominational value 100. The latent image is visible only when the note is
held horizontally at eye level.
Microlettering: This feature appears between the vertical band and the
Mahatma Gandhi portrait. It contains the word ‘RBI' and the denominational
value (100) in microletters. This feature can be seen better under a
magnifying glass.
Watermark: The watermark is a part of the CWBN paper and is visible by
holding the banknote against light. The new banknote contains the portrait of
Mahatma Gandhi with a light and shade effect and multi-directional lines.
Fluorescence: Number panels of the banknotes are printed in fluorescent
ink. The notes have  optical fibres. Both can be seen when the banknotes are
seen under ultra-violet lamp.
Paper: Banknote is printed on a special watermarked paper with substrate
cotton and cotton rag. This gives the note a unique “feel” and crackling sound.The new banknote has paper with increased grammage of 90 GSM (±3) and
caliper thickness of 110 microns (±5)
Security thread: The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma
Gandhi's portrait. The new banknotes have a machine readable windowed
demetalised clear text magnetic 2 mm wide security thread with inscriptions
‘Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI with exclusive colour shift.  Colour of the thread
shall shift from green to blue when viewed from different angles. It will
fluoresce in yellow on the reverse and the text will fluoresce on the obverse
under UV light. The thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when
held up against light.
Intaglio Printing: The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal,
Guarantee and Promise clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem on the left, RBI
Governor's signature on the obverse of the notes are printed in intaglio i.e. in
raised prints, which  can be felt by touch. The new banknotes will have raised
intaglio printing with 130 micron depth in plate making stage.
Identification mark: A triangle in intaglio on the left of the watermark window
that helps the visually impaired to identify the denomination. To make the
intaglio effect more prominent, the engraving depth has been increased from
83 microns to 160 microns.Dual Coloured optical fibre: The optical fibres will be of  dual colour and can
be seen when the banknotes are seen under ultra-violet lamp.
See through Register:  The small floral design printed both on the front
(hollow) and back (filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band
next to the Watermark window has been modified.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 100 appears vertically alongside Mahatma Gandhi
portrait in the watermark window.
Year of printing: Year of printing appears on the reverse of the banknote.Omron anti photocopying feature: A banknote with this feature, when
copied    by a colour photocopier, gives an output with a different colour
shade. The feature appears on either side of the legend Reserve Bank of
India on the obverse and in the left margin on the reverse.
Denomination numeral in see through Register : The new see through
register is in the form of denominational numeral “ 100”. Half  of the numeral
printed on the front and half on the back. Both the printed portions have an
accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when
seen against the light.
G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/189