RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279 e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 5, 2005
RBI releases the draft Report of the Internal Group
to review Guidelines on Credit Flow to SME Sector for Comments
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today released the draft Report of the Internal
Group to Review Guidelines on Credit Flow to Small and Medium Enterprises (SME)
Sector. The Internal Group was constituted in the Reserve Bank of India to inter-alia review
all circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank in the past regarding financing of
SSIs, to suggest appropriate terms for restructuring of the borrowal accounts of
SSI/Medium Enterprises and also to examine the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank for
nursing sick SSIs and suggest suitable relaxation and liberalisation of these norms.
The internal group has recommended constitution of empowered committees at the
regional level to periodically review the progress in SSI and Medium Enterprises financing
and also to coordinate with other banks/financial institutions and the state government in
removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of credit to the sector. It has also
recommended that the banks may open specialised SME branches in identified
clusters/centres with preponderance of SSI and ME units to enable the entrepreneurs to
have easy access to the bank credit and to equip bank personnel to develop the requisite
expertise. Considering the numerous problems and challenges being faced by the SME
sector and predominance of a large number of sick but potentially viable SME units, the
group has proposed to empower the boards of banks to formulate policies relating to
restructuring of accounts of SME units subject to certain guidelines. Restructuring of
accounts of corporate SSI/ME borrowers having credit limits aggregating Rs.10 crore or
more under multiple banking arrangements will be covered under the revised CDR
mechanism. While recommending continuation of the extant guidelines on definition of a
sick SSI unit, the group has recommended that all other instructions relating to viability and
parameters for relief and concessions to be provided to sick SSI units, as prescribed by the
Reserve Bank be withdrawn and banks be given freedom to lay down their own guidelines
with the approval of their Board of Directors.
The Group comprised Shri C.S.Murthy, CGM-in-Charge, Rural Planning Credit
Department as the Chairman, Shri K.U.B.Rao, Director, Department of Economic Analysis
and Policy, Shri D.N.Tripathi Joint Legal Adviser, Shri A.P.Gaur, Director, Department of
Statistical Analysis and Computer Services and Shri Rajinder Kumar, Deputy General
Manager, Department of Banking Operations and Development.
The draft report of the Group is available on the Reserve Bank of India’s website
(www.rbi.org.in). Views may please be sent to cgmincrpcd@rbi.org.in or
csmurthy@rbi.org.in or may be faxed to 022-22658276/022-22658273/022-22621011 by
May 28, 2005.
      Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1158