PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 15, 2005
RBI releases Draft Prudential Guidelines on Capital Adequacy
The Reserve Bank of India today released 'draft' guidelines for implementation
of Basel II in India and has sought feedback from the banks for finalisation. The draft
guidelines are placed on the Reserve Bank’s website (www.rbi.org.in) for wider
access.
The draft guidelines are intended to ensure migration to Basel II in a non-
disruptive manner and have been drawn by the Reserve Bank through consultation
with a representative sample of total 14 banks representing Indian public and private
banks as well as foreign banks. Keeping in view the goal to have consistency and
harmony with international standards, the Reserve Bank has decided that at a
minimum, all banks in India will adopt Standardised Approach for credit risk and
Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk with effect from March 31, 2007.
Further, to guide the banks towards a smooth transition to the revised framework,
the guidelines propose that banks in India could adopt a parallel run of the revised
framework with effect from April 1, 2006.
After adequate skills are developed, both in banks and at supervisory levels,
some banks may be allowed to migrate to IRB Approach after obtaining the specific
approval of Reserve Bank.
It be recalled that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)
released the document, "International Convergence of Capital Measurement and
Capital Standards: A Revised Framework", popularly known as Basel II, on June 26,
2004. The Revised Framework builds on the current framework to align regulatory
capital requirements more closely with underlying risks and its implementation is
expected to promote adoption of stronger risk management practices in banks.
The Revised Framework consists of three-mutually reinforcing Pillars, namely,
minimum capital requirements, supervisory review of capital adequacy and market
discipline. Under Pillar 1, the Framework offers three distinct options for computing
capital requirement for credit risk and three other options for computing capital
requirement for operational risk. These approaches for credit and operational risks
are based on increasing risk sensitivity and allow banks to select an approach that is
the most appropriate to the stage of development of bank's operations. The
approaches available for computing capital for credit risk are Standardised
Approach, Foundation Internal Rating Based Approach and Advanced Internal
Rating Based Approach. The approaches available for computing capital for
operational risk are Basic Indicator Approach, Standardised Approach and
Advanced Measurement Approach.
     Alpana Killawala
Press Release: 2004-2005/862 Chief General Manager