PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
                  www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
               www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
 e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 10, 2005
Issue of Rs 100/- denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series with additional/new
security features with inset letter 'R' in numbering panel bearing the signature of Dr. Y.V.
Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs 100/- denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series with inset letter 'R' in numbering panel bearing the signature of   Dr.
Y.V. Reddy, Governor. The new series 2005 banknotes will remain the same size and there is
no change in the images/design of the banknotes both at the back and front. While some of the
security features of the existing Mahatma Gandhi series have been retained, some have been
modified and a few new security features have been added.
The salient additional security features of banknotes are as under:
OBVERSE (Front)
Security Thread: The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma Gandhi's
portrait. The new banknotes have a machine readable windowed demetalised clear text
magnetic 2 mm wide security thread with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and "RBI" with exclusive colour
shift. Colour of the thread shall shift from green to blue when viewed from different angles. It will
fluoresce in yellow on the reverse and the text will fluoresce on the obverse under UV light. The
thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when held up against light.
See-through Register: The small floral design printed both on the front (hollow) and
back (filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the Watermark window
has been replaced by the denominational numeral 100. Half of the numeral is printed on the
front and half on the back. Both the printed portions have an accurate back to back registration
so that the numeral appears as one when seen against the light.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral 100 appears alongside Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the watermark
window.
Omron-anti photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles on either side of the legend "ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¢£{¸¨¸Ä ¤¸ÿˆÅ" and "Reserve Bank of India". A banknote
with this feature, when copied by a colour photocopier, gives an output with a different colour
shade.
The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal, Guarantee and Promise
clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem on the left, RBI Governor's signature and identification mark for
the visually impaired printed in intaglio i.e. in raised prints, (felt by touch), have been made more
prominent by raising the intaglio print.
REVERSE (Back)
There is no major change on the reverse of the banknote except the following:
Year of printing: Year of printing appears on the reverse of the banknote.
Omron anti-photocopying feature: The feature appears in the form of tiny yellow
circles in the right hand margin of the banknote
All notes in the denomination of Rs.100/- issued by the Bank in the past will continue to
be legal tender.
                      G. Raghuraj
       Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/315