PRESS RELEASE
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 4, 2005
RBI expands data coverage of its “Database on Indian Economy”
The Reserve Bank of India today stated that it has added to its Database on
India Economy, new reports/data query relating to:
* Net Capital Stock by Type of Institutions (constant and current prices)
* Capital formation by type of Assets & by type of Institutions (constant and current
prices)
* Forex Reserve - Month End - External Sector
* Foreign Investment flows – Monthly and Yearly - External Sector
* Directory of Schedule Commercial Banks in India - Quarterly - Banking Sector
In addition, facility to navigate from metadata to data/reports has also been
provided to the users. A Hindi version of the site is also now made available.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank released for public access its 'Database
on Indian Economy' through its website ( www.rbi.org.in), in November 2004. The
database can be accessed through a static headline 'Database on Indian Economy' on
the home page of the RBI site.
Through this database, the Reserve Bank initially made available, 47 static
reports both subject area-wise and frequency-wise and 31 data query templates subject
area-wise and 20 data query templates frequency-wise. The subject-areas covered
included Financial Sector, Real Sector, Financial Market, External Sector and Public
Finances. The time series data in these subject areas can be accessed through the
'Reports' facility, which allows the users to select and view the pre-formatted reports.
Since then, the Reserve Bank has expanded, in phased manner, the coverage of
the data series made available to public.  With the current release, there are now 98
static reports, 48 data query templates (subject area-wise) and 53 data query templates
(frequency-wise).
The Reserve Bank has urged the users to provide their feedback through a
feedback link on the site so as to enable further improvements in the coverage of data
series in the system.
P. V. Sadanandan
         Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1148