PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
December 29, 2005
RBI invites Feedback on "Draft guidelines for banks
for undertaking PD business"
As announced in the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2005-06, it has been
decided that the permitted structure of Primary Dealers (PD) business will be expanded to
include banks, which fulfill certain minimum criteria and subject to the safeguards.
Banks which do not at present have a partly or wholly owned subsidiary are eligible
to apply for primary dealership provided they have a minimum net owned funds (NOF) of
Rs.1000 crore, a minimum CRAR of 9 percent, net NPA level of less than 3 percent, as at
the end of the previous financial year; and should have made profit for the last three
years.
Indian banks undertaking PD business through a partly or wholly owned subsidiary
which wish to undertake PD business activity departmentally by merging / taking over PD
business from their partly / wholly owned subsidiary as well as foreign banks operating in
India who wish to undertake PD business departmentally by merging the PD business
being undertaken by group companies would also be eligible if they fulfill the criteria
regarding minimum NOF, CRAR, net NPAs and profit track record as mentioned above.
The authorization will be granted by RBI for a year, from July to June, and
thereafter be reviewed on a yearly basis based on the performance criteria, such as
underwriting in auctions, fulfillment of bidding commitment, success ratio in the primary
market and achieving turnover ratio in the secondary market, etc. Bank-PDs will be
subject to underwriting and all other obligations as applicable to standalone PDs as may
be prescribed from time to time.
No separate capital adequacy is prescribed for PD business and Capital adequacy
requirement for a bank will also apply to PD business. The Government Dated Securities
and Treasury Bills under PD business will count for SLR. The bank will also be required to
maintain a minimum size of Rs.100 crore in the separate SGL account for PD business.
RBI instructions to PDs will be applicable to Bank-PDs to the extent applicable.
The Reserve Bank of India has today placed for feedback the draft guidelines for
banks for undertaking PD business on its website (www.rbi.org.in).
The feedback on the proposals are invited and may be forwarded to Shri P.Vijaya
Bhaskar, Chief General Manager, Department of Banking Operations and Development,
Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai - 400 005 or by e-mail to
pvijayabhaskar@rbi.org.in or by fax to 022-22183785 before January 15, 2006.
G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-06/803