` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 29, 2005
Reserve Bank Announces Launch of Anonymous Order Matching
Trading in Government Securities
The Reserve Bank of India announces the launch of the electronic
order matching trading module for Government securities on its Negotiated
Dealing System (RBI-NDS-GILTS-Order Matching Segment, NDS-OM in
short) on August 1, 2005.
As part of its long term objective of developing the Government
securities market, the Reserve Bank had introduced the Negotiated Dealing
System (NDS) in February 2002 with the broad objectives of (i) ushering in an
automated electronic reporting and settlement process, (ii) facilitating
electronic auctions and (iii) providing a platform for trading in Government
securities on a negotiated basis as well as through a quote driven mechanism.
NDS has helped in achieving paperless and straight through settlement of
secondary market transactions and has brought about significant
improvements in transactional efficiency and transparency. However, the
trading facilities on the NDS (both negotiated and quote driven) were hardly
used, largely because they were not user friendly. In order to provide NDS
members with a more advanced and more efficient trading platform, and as
recommended by the Working Group on Screen Based trading in Government
Securities (Chairman: Dr. R. H. Patil), the NDS-OM trading module is now
being introduced.  NDS-OM will co-exist with the telephone based trading
system as well as the exchange based trading mechanism.
The broad features of the NDS-OM system are as follows:
(i)  The NDS-OM module is part of Reserve Bank’s Negotiated Dealing
System.
(ii) The use of NDS-OM trading module is voluntary and will be available in
addition to the existing telephone based trading mechanism on NDS.
(iii) During the first phase, the NDS-OM will serve the trading requirements
of all Banks, Primary Dealers and Financial Institutions regulated by RBI
that hold current NDS membership. Other NDS members will be
extended access in the next phase, as appropriate.  The option of
extending NDS-OM to non-NDS members will be examined in due
course.
(iv) The system will be purely order driven with all orders being matched
based on strict price/time priority.
(v) The system will be an anonymous order matching system wherein
identity of parties is not revealed before or at the time of trade. The
Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) will become the central
counterparty to each trade done on the system.2
(vi) The system will allow straight-through processing (STP) and trades
executed will flow straight to CCIL in a ready-for-settlement stage.
(vii) The system will provide functionalities for order management (placing,
modifying or canceling orders), trade related queries, activity log, market
information and analytics.
(viii) The system, to start with, will support dealing in all Central Government
and State Government securities for T+1 settlement. The system will be
further upgraded later to facilitate trading in discounted instruments like
Treasury Bills.
The Reserve Bank will disseminate information on trades done on the
NDS-OM on a near real-time basis, in addition to the dissemination of
information on other NDS trades as is being done currently, on its website,
www.rbi.org.in
   G. Raghuraj
    Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/129