PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 28, 2005
Government of Gujarat signs
 MOU with Reserve Bank of India
The Government of Gujarat and the Reserve Bank of India have today signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with regard to urban cooperative banks in the state of
Gujarat. Consequent upon this, a state level Task Force on Urban Cooperative Banks
(TAFCUB) has been constituted for Gujarat. Smt. Vani J. Sharma, Regional Director of
the Reserve Bank for the state of Gujarat is the Chairman of the TAFCUB and Shri J. P.
Gupta, Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Gujarat its co-chairman. The other members
of the TAFCUB are: a nominee of the State Government of Gujarat, Shri N. S.
Vishwanathan, Chief General Manager, Urban Banks Department, Reserve Bank of
India, Central Office, Mumbai, Shri D. Krishna, Chief Executive Officer, National
Federation of Urban Banks (NAFCUB), New Delhi, and Shri Dollarrai V. Kotecha,
Chairman, Gujarat State Urban Banks Federation.  The first meeting of the TAFCUB will
be held soon.
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing the
training, computerisation needs of the urban cooperative banks in the state of Gujarat
with the objective of upgrading their human resources skills and technological
infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and quality of
management information systems.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-term Review of Annual Policy announced in
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a vision document for urban
cooperative banks would be prepared.  Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in public
domain a draft vision document in March 2005.  Based on the responses received, the
vision document is being finalised.
As the urban cooperative banks are subject to dual control by the Reserve Bank
and state governments, the vision document envisaged the signing of Memorandum of
Understanding between State Governments and the Reserve Bank of India to put in
place an arrangement through which there is a convergence on the approach and
remedial actions required to be taken for facilitating the development of the sector. The
vision document also proposed the constitution of a State Level Task Force of Urban
Cooperative Banks, under the chairmanship of Regional Director of the Reserve Bank
for the concerned state with Registrar of Cooperative Societies as the co-chairman and
representatives from the State and the National Federation for Urban Cooperative
Banks (NAFCUB) among others, as its members, for the purpose of identifying the
potentially viable urban cooperative banks and drawing up a time bound action plan for
their revival by setting specific monitorable milestones.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/1377