PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
April 3, 2008 
 
RBI releases for Public Comments Concept Paper on  
Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres  
The Reserve Bank of India has, today placed on its website, a concept 
paper on Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres for public comments. 
The paper has three parts: Part-A deals with matters relating to financial literacy, 
Part-B deals with those relating to credit counselling and Part-C outlines the 
suggested Scheme for Financial Literacy and Counselling Centres. 
Comments and suggestions on the concept paper may please be sent to 
the Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Rural Planning and Credit Department, 
Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai or through email so as to reach 
latest by April 30, 2008. 
It may be recalled that the Working Group to Examine the Procedures and 
Processes of Agricultural Loans (Chairman: Shri C.P. Swarnkar), appointed by the 
Reserve Bank, had recommended in its report  (April 2007) that banks should 
actively consider opening of counselling centres, either individually or with pooled 
resources, for credit and technological counselling. Another Working Group 
constituted by the Reserve Bank to suggest measures for assisting distressed 
farmers (Chairman Shri S.S. Johl) had also suggested that financial and livelihood 
counselling are important for increasing viability of credit. 
Based on the recommendations of these working groups, the Reserve 
Bank had in May 2007 advised all the State Level Bankers' Committee (SLBC) 
convenor banks that they may initiate action to set up a Financial Literacy and 
Credit Counselling Centre (FLCC) on a pilot basis in any one district in the State/ 
Union Territory coming under their jurisdiction. Several banks have since taken 
initiatives in opening credit counselling centres in the country. 
In its Mid-term Review of the Annual Policy for 2007-08, the Reserve Bank 
had stated that a concept paper on the subject would be prepared and placed on 
its website for feedback in order to take this initiative forward. Recently, in his 
Budget speech for 2008-09, the Finance Minister indicated that individuals such 
as retired bank officers, ex-servicemen, etc., will be allowed to be appointed, 
among others, as credit counsellors. The concept paper on Financial Literacy and 
Credit Counselling Centres has been prepared and placed on the website in this 
context. 
 
 
   G. Raghuraj 
                 Deputy General Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1280  