  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ? 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
¬¸¿ ?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
October 24, 2008 
Governor, Dr. D. Subbarao’s Press Statement on Stance of  
Monetary Policy for the Remaining Period of 2008-09 
“This Mid-Term Monetary Policy Review of the Reserve Bank of India is set in the 
context of several complex and compelling policy challenges. The global financial system 
is in a crisis of unprecedented dimensions. Across the world, there have been severe 
disruptions in money markets, sharp declines in stock markets and extreme risk aversion in 
financial markets. Governments, central banks and financial regulators around the world 
are responding to the crisis with aggressive, radical and unconventional measures to 
restore confidence and stabilize the markets.     
2. India’s financial sector is stable and healthy.  Indian banks do not have direct financial 
exposure to the US sub-prime assets. Foreign subsidiaries and foreign branches of Indian 
banks have suffered some mark-to-market losses on financial instruments due to the 
general widening of credit spreads. These losses are modest relative to the size of their 
business. Adequate provisioning has been made for these. The overall capital adequacy 
ratio of commercial banks in India is 12.7 per cent, well above the regulatory minimum of 9 
per cent and the Basel Accord requirement of 8 per cent.    Furthermore, the regulatory 
mandate of 25 per cent as SLR and 6.5 per cent as CRR provides an inherent strength to 
the Indian banks.  The most prominent symptom of the problem in the financial sectors of 
advanced countries has been the freezing up of inter-bank markets.  On the contrary, the 
inter-bank market in India has been functioning in an orderly manner.  
3. Nevertheless, the global developments have had indirect, knock-on effects on domestic 
financial markets. Money markets have experienced unusual tightening of liquidity in recent 
weeks as a result of global developments which were amplified by transient local factors 
such as advance tax payments. The foreign exchange market has experienced pressure 
on account of FII portfolio outflows and the enhanced foreign exchange requirements of oil 
and fertiliser companies. Constraints in access to external financing as also repricing of 
risks and higher spreads resulted in additional demand from corporates for domestic bank 
credit with attendant hardening of interest rates across the spectrum.   
4. In the wake of the stress on our financial markets as a result of the global financial crisis, 
the Reserve Bank announced a series of measures starting mid-September 2008 to ease 
both domestic and foreign exchange liquidity.  The following are the more important ones: 
• CRR was reduced by a cumulative 250 basis points effective from the fortnight 
beginning October 11.  
• As an ad hoc and temporary measure, banks have been allowed to avail of 
additional liquidity support under the LAF up to one per cent of their net demand and 
time liabilities (NDTL).  • A special 14-day repo facility for an amount of Rs.20,000 crore has been instituted 
to alleviate liquidity stress faced by mutual funds, and banks have been allowed 
access to a special LAF window up to an additional 0.5 per cent of NDTL exclusively 
for this purpose.  
• Reserve Bank provided an advance of Rs.25,000 crore to financial institutions  
under the Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme pending release of 
money by the Government.  
• The interest rate ceilings on FCNR (B) and NR(E)RA term deposits were increased 
by 100 basis points each.  
• The Reserve Bank also announced that it would institute special market operations 
to meet the foreign exchange requirements of public sector oil market companies 
against oil bonds when they become available.   
5. In order to alleviate the pressures on domestic credit markets brought on by the indirect 
impact of the global liquidity constraints and, in particular, to maintain financial stability, it 
was decided on October 20, 2008 to reduce the repo rate under the Liquidity Adjustment 
Facility (LAF) by 100 basis points to 8.0 per cent with immediate effect. 
6. The measures indicated above have substantially eased the liquidity stress in domestic 
financial markets. The total liquidity support provided  through reductions in the CRR, the 
temporary accommodation under the SLR and the advance under the agricultural debt 
relief scheme is of the order of Rs.1,85,000 crore. In the inter-bank call money market, 
rates have softened from well above the repo rate to a level just above the reverse repo 
rate.  The LAF window saw a mode reversal from a net injection of over Rs.90,000 crore 
on October 1, 2008 to a net absorption through reverse repos of  over Rs.35,000 crore on 
October 23, 2008. Yields in the benchmark 10 year G-Secs dropped from 8.3 per cent on 
October 3, 2008 to 7.58 per cent on October 23, 2008. It is expected that the cut in the 
repo rate effected on October 20, 2008 will further ease the constraints in money and credit 
markets.  
7. The task of monetary policy has always centred around managing a judicious balance 
between price stability, sustaining the growth momentum and maintaining financial stability. 
The relative emphasis across these objectives has varied from time to time depending on 
the underlying macroeconomic conditions. Prudent regulatory surveillance and effective 
supervision have ensured that our financial sector has been and continues to be robust. 
The global financial turmoil has, however, reinforced the importance of putting special 
emphasis on preserving financial stability. At the same time, inflation, which is still in 
double digits and moderation in growth continue to be critical policy concerns.  
Consequently, the central task for the conduct of monetary policy has become more 
complex than before, with increasing priority being given to financial stability.  The current 
challenge, accordingly, is to strike an optimal balance between preserving financial 
stability, maintaining price stability, anchoring inflation expectations, and sustaining the 
growth momentum.   
8. The global downturn may be deeper, and the recovery longer, than expected earlier. 
Consequently, the adverse implications through trade and financial channels for emerging 
economies, including India, have amplified. These adverse developments are overlaid on 
the moderation of growth in industry and services sectors in the first half of 2008-09. 
Taking these developments and prospects into account, the Reserve Bank has revised the 
projection of overall real GDP growth for 2008-09 to a range of 7.5-8.0 per cent.  9. Globally, pressures from commodity prices, including crude, appear to be abating, 
though they continue to rule at elevated levels. Domestically, prices of food articles are 
moderating and the beneficial effects of the south-west monsoon should enable a further 
easing in the coming months. There are also incipient signs of some softening in prices of 
manufactured goods. Keeping in view the supply management measures taken by the 
Government and the lagged demand response to the monetary policy measures taken by 
the Reserve Bank over the last one year, RBI maintains its earlier projection of inflation of 
7.0 per cent by end-March 2009.  
10. Non-food credit has posted a growth of 29 per cent on a year-on-year basis as of 
October 10, 2008 which is well beyond the projected level of 20 per cent for 2008-09. 
Banks should continue to lend for productive purposes and, in particular, permit drawals of 
sanctioned limits, guided as always by their commercial judgment. It will be in order for 
banks to consider restructuring the dues of small and medium enterprises on merits. At the 
same time, they should pay attention to maintaining credit quality. In pursuit of this 
objective, banks should focus on stricter credit appraisals on a sectoral basis, monitor loan 
to value ratios and calibrate their credit portfolio in tune with their asset-liability projections. 
The Reserve Bank will monitor the rate of credit growth and credit quality closely and will, 
as necessary, engage with select banks which are outliers on the norms.  
11. India's balance of payments continues to reflect strength and resilience in a highly 
unsettled international environment. In the capital account, sustained FDI inflows and 
higher NRI flows have partly off-set the impact of the FII outflows. Overall, during 2008-09, 
the current account deficit may be higher and net capital flows lower than during last year, 
but it is expected that net capital flows would meet the external financing requirements.  
12. Given the uncertain global financial situation, monitoring and maintenance of domestic 
financial stability warrants continuous attention. The Reserve Bank will maintain a close 
vigil on the entire financial system to prevent pressures building up in the financial markets. 
This will include enhancing liquidity if pressures persist. This could also mean curtailing 
liquidity if the recent liquidity easing measures are seen to have injected excess liquidity, 
thereby stoking inflationary pressures.  
13. The global financial situation, described as the worst since the Great Depression, 
continues to be uncertain and unsettled. No country can remain unscathed in a crisis of 
this proportion. This is uncharted territory and experience to date has evidenced the need 
to go beyond standard or conventional solutions. The Reserve Bank has endeavoured to 
be proactive, and has taken measures to manage the rapid developments and ease 
pressures stemming from the global crisis.  The Reserve Bank reiterates that it is confident 
of managing the situation and of minimising the adverse impact of the global crisis on the 
Indian economy.  Our financial system is healthy and resilient, and our economic 
fundamentals are strong.  Once the global situation is stabilised, and calm and confidence 
are restored, we will return to our higher growth trajectory.  
14. Based on the above overall assessment of the macroeconomic situation, the stance of 
monetary policy for the rest of 2008-09 will be as follows: 
• Ensure a monetary and interest rate environment that optimally balances the 
objectives of financial stability, price stability and well-anchored inflation 
expectations, and growth;  
• Continue with the policy of active demand management of liquidity through 
appropriate use of all instruments including the CRR, open market operations 
(OMO), the MSS and the LAF to maintain orderly conditions in financial markets; • In the context of the uncertain and unsettled global situation and its indirect impact 
on the domestic economy in general and the financial markets in particular, closely 
and continuously monitor the situation and respond swiftly and effectively to 
developments, employing both conventional and unconventional measures;  
• Emphasise credit quality and credit delivery, in particular, for employment-intensive 
sectors, while pursuing financial inclusion. 
15. Against the backdrop of recent global and domestic developments and in the light of 
measures taken by the Reserve Bank over the last month, we have kept the Bank Rate, 
the repo rate and the reverse repo rate under the LAF and the cash reserve ratio (CRR) 
unchanged for the present. The Reserve Bank is closely and continuously monitoring the 
evolving macroeconomic and financial conditions, globally and domestically, and will 
respond to evolving circumstances proactively and swiftly.” 
G. Raghuraj 
Deputy General Manager 
Press Release : 2008-2009/560 