PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 www.rbi.org.in 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
  February 29, 2008 
 
RBI revamps its On-line Data Warehouse Site  
“Database on Indian Economy” (DBIE) 
The Reserve Bank of India today enhanced the functionalities of data 
warehouse site viz., Database on Indian Economy (DBIE): RBI's Data Warehouse. 
Built primarily for the benefit of researchers, analysts and other users, the website is  
created to provide the public with an access to the published data series, with 
additional details on some series, as available in Reserve Bank of India’s enterprise-
wide data warehouse. This is an advanced mode of information dissemination 
through which long time series data are made available in a user-friendly manner 
including downloading data in Excel, CSV and PDF format. The site is well accepted 
by the community and is visited by around 6,000 users on every month.  The site 
was first released to public on November 1, 2004.  
The enhanced site has now added facilities like, sophisticated homepage, 
improved search option, discussions on any report and advanced query. The most 
important new feature is enabling the users to create reports from the data marts in 
desired formats. In other words, apart from standard reports, data can be accessed 
through adhoc query mode, i.e., 'Simple Query' (previously known as 'Data Query') 
and 'Advanced Query' (new feature). Through the 'Advanced Query' feature, users 
can create new reports in desired format using the available data marts. Users can 
select appropriate universe as per their choice from the list of universes. Using 
graphic user interface (GUI) tool, users can drag and drop selected data for the 
selected period, specifing values / value range for the respective Time Dimension 
Object. These reports also provide options to the users to download the report into 
their local computer in Excel/CSV/PDF file format. 
A number of additional data series on various subject areas, including 
financial sector, real sector, financial market, external sector, public finance and 
corporate finance, have been added since its inception. At present there are 182 
static reports, arranged both, according to subject and frequency. In addition, there 
are 73 data query reports subjectwise, 53 data query templates frequencywise and 
38 data mart universes which can be utilised to create user defined reports using a 
web browser. These reports are released along with their metadata (i.e., business 
terms and notes on tables).  
The Database on Indian Economy can be easily accessed on the RBI site 
(www.rbi.org.in) from the Database section. This can also be directly accessed 
through RBI's secured website (https://reservebank.org.in/).  
Economists, statisticians, data analysts and market participants may find this 
site useful. Users are requested to send their feedback, through the `feedback' link 
on the site. 
      G. Raghuraj 
           Deputy General Manager 
Press Release : 2007-2008/1142 