`

PRESS RELEASE

PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358, 2270 3279

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA www.rbi.org.in www.rbi.org.in\hindi

e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in

January 14, 2008
RBI releases DRG Study on "Municipal Finance in India ­ An Assessment" [Note: DRG is constituted in the Reserve Bank's Department of Economic Analysis and Policy for undertaking effective policy-oriented research backed by strong analytical and empirical basis on subjects of current interests. The views expressed in these studies are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank] The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today published a Study entitled "Municipal Finance in India ­ An Assessment". The Study is co-authored by Dr. P.K.Mohanty, Mission Director, Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, Government of India, along with three research staff members (B.M.Misra, Rajan Goyal and P.D.Jeromi) from the Reserve Bank. The Study was undertaken under aegis of the Development Research Group (DRG). Using the data from 35 metropolitan Municipal Corporations (MCs), the Study attempts to analyse the reasons for differential performance of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) with respect to fiscal parameters and provision of civil amenities. The Study was undertaken in the background of assignment of important responsibilities to the ULBs under the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992. The major findings of the Study are summarised as follows: There is a mismatch between functions and finances of ULBs, which primarily explains the vertical imbalance. Out of 18 functions to be performed by the municipal bodies in India, less than half have a corresponding financing source. Own taxes and user charges of the ULBs in India are grossly inadequate to meet the expenditure needs of ULBs. Elaborate State Government controls on municipal authorities to levy taxes and user charges, to set rates, to grant exemptions, to borrow funds, etc, and on the design, quantum and timing of inter-governmental transfers constrain the ability of the ULBs in mobilising resources. The Study states that the conventional method for assessing municipal finances in terms of analysis of revenue and expenditures of municipalities may not be appropriate as the ULBs are required to generate a revenue surplus due to statutory requirements. Overall resource gaps of ULBs, as seen from municipal budgets, are not very large. However, the spending by all the MCs are lower than that required for providing a minimum level of civil amenities. Based on per capita spending on core services by metropolitan MCs, the Study indicates that the level of underspending on an average works out to about 76 per cent. The Study suggests that ULBs have considerable scope for debt financing as they have low debt and interest coverage ratios.

