`

PRESS RELEASE

PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358, 2270 3279

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA www.rbi.org.in www.rbi.org.in\hindi

e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in

February 8, 2008 Reserve Bank of India releases Monsoon 2007 Issue of Its Occasional Papers The Reserve Bank of India today released the Monsoon 2007 issue of its Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers. The Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers is a research journal of the Reserve Bank and contains contributions of the Bank's staff and reflects the views of the authors. This issue is woven around some important themes which are at the forefront of policy discussion. It contains articles, special notes and book reviews. The first paper entitled, `Monetary Policy Committee: What Works and Where' by Michael Debabrata Patra and Amaresh Samantaraya undertakes a survey of the literature and the cross-country experience in regard to what is termed as the `quiet revolution' in central banking since the late 1990s, i.e., the formation of monetary policy committees (MPCs) as decision making mechanism in central banks. The paper notes that issues relating to the constitution of MPC, its empowerment and functions have to be assessed in the broader context of the evolving social, political and legal/institutional ethos in an economy. The paper also constructs an index of MPC Empowerment, taking into account several characteristics in terms of its composition, transparency and autonomy and suggests that more empowered MPCs seem to deliver better inflation results but with little improvement in growth outcomes relative to their less empowered counterparts. The second paper entitled, `Commodity Derivatives and Price Risk Management: An Empirical Anecdote from India' by S.M. Lokare endeavours to test the efficacy and performance of commodity derivatives in India in steering price risk management. The paper notes that commodity derivatives trading in India witnessed a massive spurt in the recent period. The total value of committee derivatives trading accounts for about 2/3 of overall GDP, reflecting the extent of depth that this market has gained in the economy. In India, however, it is largely the agricultural commodities, which are traded on the existing exchanges. The paper observes that liquidity in respect of primary commodities was found to be high only in few commodities, such as, castorseed, soyabean oil and to some extent cotton, while in the case of others, it was quite thin. These markets in India are thus, yet to achieve minimum critical liquidity that can generate greater economies of scale, minimum transaction costs and wider participation. By and large, trading in the commodity derivatives is moving in the desired direction of achieving improved operational efficiency, albeit, at a slower pace. The paper indicates that several measures in the institutional, infrastructural and legal spheres are warranted for the rapid development of these markets in the country.

