  œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú  PRESS RELEASE ?  
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
¬¸¿?¸¸£ ¢¨¸ž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, ‡¬¸.¤¸ú.‡¬¸.Ÿ¸¸Š¸Ä, Ÿ¸º¿¤¸ƒÄ 400001 
¨¸½¤¸¬¸¸ƒ’ À www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S. Marg, Mumbai 400001 
ƒ-Ÿ¸½¥¸ emailÀ helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
ûÅ¸½›¸/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸/Fax: 91 22 2270 3279 
 
 
April 29, 2008 
 
RBI Governor announces Annual Policy Statement for the year 2008-09 
 
Dr. Y. Venugopal Reddy, Governor, in a meeting with Chief Executives of 
major commercial banks today presented the Annual Policy Statement for the 
Year 2008-09. This Statement consists of two parts: Part I. Annual Statement 
on Monetary Policy for the Year 2008-09; and Part II. Annual Statement on 
Developmental and Regulatory Policies for the Year 2008-09. 
 
Highlights 
 
• High priority to price stability, well-anchored inflation expectations and 
orderly conditions in financial markets while sustaining the growth 
momentum. 
 
• Swift response on a continuous basis to evolving adverse international and 
domestic developments through both conventional and unconventional 
measures. 
 
• Emphasis on credit quality and credit delivery while pursuing financial 
inclusion. 
 
• Bank Rate, Reverse Repo Rate and Repo Rate kept unchanged. 
 
• Scheduled banks required to maintain CRR of 8.25 per cent with effect 
from the fortnight beginning May 24, 2008.  
 
• GDP growth projection for 2008-09 in the range of 8.0- 8.5 per cent.  
 
• Inflation to be brought down to around 5.5 per cent in 2008-09 with a 
preference for bringing it close to 5.0 per cent as soon as possible. Going 
forward, the resolve is to condition policy and perceptions for inflation in 
the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent so that an inflation rate of around 3.0 per cent 
becomes a medium-term objective. 
 
• M3 expansion to be moderated in the range of 16.5-17.0 per cent during 
2008-09. 
  
• Deposits projected to increase by around 17.0 per cent or Rs.5,50,000 
crore during 2008-09.  
 
• Adjusted non-food credit projected to increase by around 20.0 per cent 
during 2008-09. 
 
• Active demand management of liquidity through appropriate use of the 
CRR stipulations and open market operations (OMO) including the MSS 
and the LAF. 
 
• Introduction of STRIPS in Government securities by the end of 2008-09.  
 
• A clearing and settlement arrangement for OTC rupee derivatives 
proposed.  
 
• Domestic crude oil refining companies would be permitted to hedge their 
commodity price risk on overseas exchanges/markets on domestic 
purchase of crude oil and sale of petroleum products based on underlying 
contract. 
  
• Currency futures to be introduced in eligible exchanges in consultation 
with the SEBI; broad framework to be finalised by May 2008.  
 
Indian companies to be allowed to invest overseas in energy and natural 
• 
resources sectors.  
 
• Reserve Bank can be approached for capitalisation of export proceeds 
beyond the prescribed period of realisation.  
 
• Loans granted to RRBs for on-lending to agriculture and allied activities to 
be classified as indirect finance to agriculture.  
 
• The shortfall in lending to weaker sections would be taken into account for 
contribution to RIDF with effect from April 2009. 
 
• RRBs allowed to sell loan assets to other banks in excess of their 
prescribed priority sector exposure.  
 
• The Reserve Bank to disseminate details of various charges levied by 
banks.  
 
• Asset classification norms for credit to infrastructure projects relaxed. 
 
• The prudential guidelines for specific off-balance sheet exposures of 
banks to be reviewed.  
 
• Reserve Bank to carry out supervisory review of banks' exposure to the 
commodity sector. • The limit of bank loans to individuals for housing having lower risk weight 
of 50 per cent enhanced from Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 30 lakh.   
 
• Consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates proposed.  
 
• Working Group to be set up for a supervisory framework for SPVs/Trusts. 
 
• Inter-departmental Group to review the existing regulatory and supervisory 
framework for overseas operations of Indian banks. 
 
• All transactions of Rs. one crore and above made mandatory to be routed 
through the electronic payment mechanism. 
 
• Dispense with the extant eligibility norms for opening on-site ATMs for 
well-managed and financially sound UCBs.  
 
• Regulations in respect of capital adequacy, liquidity and disclosure norms 
for systemically important NBFCs to be reviewed.  
 
Details 
 
Domestic Developments 
• The advance estimates of the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) 
placed real GDP growth at 8.7 per cent for 2007-08, over and above 9.6 
per cent in 2006-07. 
• On a year-on-year basis, WPI inflation stood at 7.4 per cent at end-March 
2008 as compared with 5.9 per cent a year ago. During 2007-08, headline 
inflation declined from 6.4 per cent at the beginning of the financial year to 
a low of 3.1 per cent in mid-October before firming up from mid-February 
2008 onwards. 
• The average price of the Indian basket of international crude increased by 
27.6 per cent from US $ 62.4 per barrel during 2006-07 to US $ 79.7 per 
barrel in 2007-08. 
• Money supply (M ) increased by 20.7 per cent (Rs.6,86,096 crore) in 
3
2007-08 as compared with 21.5 per cent (Rs.5,86,548 crore) in 2006-07. 
• Reserve money increased by 30.9 per cent (Rs.2,19,326 crore) during 
2007-08 as compared with 23.7 per cent (Rs.1,35,935 crore) in the 
previous year. 
• Aggregate deposits of SCBs increased by 22.2 per cent (Rs.5,80,208 
crore) during 2007-08 as compared with 23.8 per cent (Rs.5,02,885 crore) 
in the previous year. 
• Non-food credit extended by the scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) 
increased by 22.3 per cent (Rs.4,19,425 crore) as compared with 28.5 per 
cent (Rs.4,18,282 crore) in the previous year. • The incremental non-food credit-deposit ratio for the banking system 
declined to 72.3 per cent during 2007-08 from 83.2 per cent in 2006-07, 
109.3 per cent in 2005-06 and 130.0 per cent in 2004-05. 
• The total flow of funds from SCBs to the commercial sector, including non-
SLR investments, increased by 21.9 per cent (Rs.4,31,256 crore) in 2007-
08 as against 27.3 per cent (Rs.4,22,363 crore) in 2006-07. 
• During 2007-08, the financial markets experienced alternating shifts in 
liquidity conditions. 
• The total overhang of liquidity as reflected in the balances under the LAF, 
the MSS and surplus cash balances of the Central Government taken 
together increased to the intra-year peak of Rs.2,73,694 crore on March 
27, 2008 before declining to Rs.2,43,879 crore on April 25, 2008.  
• Movements in interest rates in the domestic financial markets reflected the 
factors driving changes in liquidity with the banking system during 2007-
08.  
• The average daily turnover in the foreign exchange market increased to 
US $ 57.3 billion at end-March 2008 from US $ 33.2 billion at end-March 
2007. 
• Commercial banks' investment in Government and other approved 
securities increased by 22.9 per cent (Rs.1,81,222 crore) during 2007-08, 
significantly higher than 10.3 per cent (Rs.74,062 crore) in 2006-07.  
• Commercial banks' stock of statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) eligible securities 
marginally increased to 27.4 per cent of the banking system's net demand 
and time liabilities (NDTL) in March 2008 from 27.3 per cent in March 
2007. 
• Interest rates offered by the public sector banks (PSBs) on deposits of 
above one year maturity moved from the range of 7.25-9.50 per cent in 
March 2007 to 8.00-9.25 per cent in March 2008. 
• The benchmark prime lending rates (BPLRs) of PSBs increased by 75 
basis points from a range of 12.25-12.75 per cent to 12.25-13.50 per cent 
during 2007-08.  
• The BSE Sensex (1978-79=100) increased by 19.7 per cent during the 
year from 13072 at end-March 2007 to 15644 at end-March 2008. 
•  The weighted average yield on primary issuance of the Central 
Government's dated securities increased by 23 basis points to 8.12 per 
cent in 2007-08 from 7.89 per cent in the previous year. 
External Developments  
• Information available from the DGCI&S indicates that merchandise exports 
increased by 22.8 per cent in US dollar terms during April-February 2007-
08 as compared with 23.2 per cent in the corresponding period of the 
previous year. Imports showed an increase of 30.1 per cent as compared 
with 25.2 per cent during the same period.  • While the increase in oil imports was lower at 26.4 per cent as compared 
with 31.2 per cent, non-oil import recorded a higher growth of 31.8 per 
cent as compared with 22.6 per cent. 
• During April-February 2007-08, the trade deficit widened to US $ 72.5 
billion which was 46.8 per cent higher than the deficit of US $ 49.4 billion 
in the corresponding period of the previous year. 
• The sustained strength of capital flows during 2007-08 is noteworthy as 
the foreign exchange reserves increased by US $ 110.5 billion to US $ 
309.7 billion by end-March 2008. 
• The Indian foreign exchange market witnessed generally orderly 
conditions during 2007-08 with the exchange rate exhibiting two-way 
movements. The rupee appreciated by 9.1 per cent against the US dollar 
and by 7.5 per cent against pound sterling but depreciated by 7.7 per cent 
against the Japanese yen and by 7.8 per cent against the euro during 
2007-08. 
  
Global Developments  
• Global economic activity decelerated somewhat in relation to earlier 
expectations, mainly on account of the slowdown in the US economy.  
• According to the World Economic Outlook (WEO) of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), the forecast for global real GDP growth, on a 
purchasing power parity basis, is expected to slow from 4.9 per cent in 
2007 to 3.7 per cent in 2008. 
• Continuing strong demand and dwindling stocks are reflected in a tight 
supply-demand food situation globally, leading to the emergence of food 
price inflation as a key risk to global stability. 
• The Food and Agricultural Organisation's (FAO) global food price index, 
which rose by 40 per cent in 2007 to the highest level on record, has 
continued to increase in the first quarter of 2008 as well, as world food 
stocks have fallen to their lowest levels in 25 years. 
• In the global foodgrains market, prices of major crops such as corn, 
soyabeans and wheat have increased by 58.2 per cent, 86.3 per cent and 
56.5 per cent, respectively, by April 25, 2008 from a year ago in response 
to surging demand. 
• According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA), tight 
fundamentals, reflected by low available crude oil surplus production 
capacity, combined with supply concerns in several oil exporting countries, 
have continued to put upward pressure on world crude oil prices. 
• In the EMEs, the recent jump in headline inflation caused by higher energy 
and food prices are of concern since this requires a balanced response in 
controlling inflation while being alert to decelerating impulses from the 
slowdown in the developed countries and the possibilities of prolonged 
global financial market turmoil.  • Since the beginning of the turbulence in August 2007, central banks of 
advanced economies have responded with both conventional and 
unconventional measures to ease liquidity stress in financial markets and 
solvency issues among large financial institutions. 
• Some central banks such as the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of 
England, the Bank of Canada have cut policy rates since the third quarter 
of 2007 when the financial market turmoil surfaced.  
• Central banks of several countries, including the euro area, New Zealand, 
Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and Mexico have not changed their 
rates since the last quarter of 2007.  
• Some central banks that have tightened their policy rates in recent months 
include the Reserve Bank of Australia, the People's Bank of China, the 
Banco Central de Chile and Banco Central do Brasil. 
• Large capital flows to EMEs have elicited monetary tightening responses 
from central banks either through hike in their policy rates or reserve 
requirements or both. Meanwhile, in several EMEs, central bank bonds 
have continued to absorb liquidity from the banking system. 
• Measures directly aimed at managing capital flows are also in evidence in 
many EMEs.  
 
Overall Assessment 
• While aggregate supply capacities expanded and alleviated domestic 
macro-imbalances in 2007-08 to some extent, available indicators suggest 
that economic activity in India currently continues to be mainly demand-
driven.   
• The pick-up in inflation during the fourth quarter of 2007-08 has mainly 
emanated from supply-side pressures such as the one-off increase in 
domestic petrol and diesel prices to partially offset the global crude oil 
price increase over the year; continuous hardening of prices of petroleum 
products that are not administered, rising prices of wheat and oilseeds and 
the adjustment in steel prices in March 2008 due to the surge in 
international prices. 
• The upsurge in inflation in India has occurred at a time when global 
commodity prices have been volatile at historically elevated levels and 
central banks in mature and emerging economies alike have been 
articulating heightened inflation concerns.  
• There are concerns that demand pressures, which have been reasonably 
contained so far, are being coupled with supply-side factors which, if not 
temporary, could impact domestic inflation significantly.  
• The moderation in non-food credit growth has been marked in respect of 
interest-sensitive sectors which had been recording significantly elevated 
growth rates in preceding years.  • During the fourth quarter of 2007-08, financial markets were impacted by 
unusual swings and high volatility in foreign exchange flows as well as in 
cash balances of the Government with the Reserve Bank with consequent 
shifts in liquidity conditions. 
• Growth forecasts for EMEs have been moderated in the face of the 
financial turbulence and the anticipated slowdown in the US economy. A 
key risk to the outlook for EMEs is rising food, energy and commodity 
prices that are already imparting inflationary pressures and raising 
concerns about impacting the momentum of growth in these economies.  
• The recent monetary policy responses in the US have also heightened the 
uncertainties facing EMEs by widening interest rate differentials and 
increasing the costs of sterilisation, especially in a period when inflationary 
pressures warrant tightening.   
• The outlook for the global financial system is overcast by the rising 
incidence of losses and write-offs in banking systems in the US and 
Europe amidst dislocations in the securitised credit market. There are also 
growing uncertainties surrounding the viability of financial guarantors and 
doubts about their business models as well as the approach of rating 
agencies with potential systemic implications.  
• In the overall assessment, there have been significant shifts in both global 
and domestic developments in relation to initial assessments. The dangers 
of global recession have increased at the current juncture although 
consensus expectations do not rule out a soft landing. On the domestic 
front, the outlook remained positive up to January 2008. Since then, the 
prospects for growth in the year ahead have been trimmed as risks to 
inflation and inflation expectations from the upside pressures due to 
international food, crude and metal prices have become more potent and 
real than before.  
Stance of Monetary Policy for 2008-09 
• For policy purposes, real GDP growth in 2008-09 may be placed in the 
range of 8.0 to 8.5 per cent, assuming that (a) global financial and 
commodity markets and real economy will be broadly aligned with the 
central scenario as currently assessed and (b) domestically, normal 
monsoon conditions prevail. 
• In view of the lagged and cumulative effects of monetary policy on 
aggregate demand and assuming that supply management would be 
conducive, the policy endeavour would be to bring down inflation from the 
current high level of above 7.0 per cent to around 5.5 per cent in 2008-09 
with a preference for bringing it as close to 5.0 per cent as soon as 
possible.   
• In view of the monetary overhang, it is necessary to moderate monetary 
expansion and plan for a rate of money supply in the range of 16.5-17.0 
per cent in 2008-09 in consonance with the outlook on growth and 
inflation so as to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability in the 
period ahead. 
• Consistent with the projections of money supply, the growth in aggregate 
deposits in 2008-09 is placed at around 17.0 per cent or around  
Rs.5,50,000 crore. 
• Based on an overall assessment of the sources of funding and the overall 
credit requirements of the various productive sectors of the economy, the 
growth of non-food credit including investments in 
bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private 
corporate sector and commercial paper (CP) is placed at around 20.0 per 
cent in 2008-09. 
• Given the unprecedented complexities involved and the heightened 
uncertainties at this juncture, there are some key factors that govern the 
setting of the stance of monetary policy for 2008-09 viz., (i) the challenge 
of escalated and volatile food and energy prices; (ii) even as investment 
demand remains strong, supply elasticities are expected to improve 
further; (iii) recent initiatives in regard to supply-management by the 
Government of India and measures relating to the cash reserve ratio by 
the Reserve Bank of India; (iv) the importance of anchoring expectations 
relating to both global and domestic developments.  
• In view of the above unprecedented uncertainties and dilemmas, it is 
important to take informed judgements with regard to the timing and 
magnitude of policy actions; and such judgements need to have the 
benefit of evaluation of incoming information on a continuous basis. 
• To demonstrate on a continuing basis a determination to act decisively, 
effectively and swiftly to curb any signs of adverse developments in 
regard to inflation expectations.  
• The Reserve Bank will continue with its policy of active demand 
management of liquidity through appropriate use of the CRR stipulations 
and open market operations (OMO) including the MSS and the LAF, using 
all the policy instruments at its disposal flexibly, as and when the situation 
warrants. 
• Barring the emergence of any adverse and unexpected developments in 
various sectors of the economy, assuming that capital flows are effectively 
managed, and keeping in view the current assessment of the economy 
including the outlook for growth and inflation, the overall stance of 
monetary policy in 2008-09 will broadly be: 
 • to ensure a monetary and interest rate environment that accords high 
priority to price stability, well-anchored inflation expectations and 
orderly conditions in financial markets while being conducive to 
continuation of the growth momentum.  • to respond swiftly on a continuing basis to the evolving constellation of 
adverse international developments and to the domestic situation 
impinging on inflation expectations, financial stability and growth 
momentum, with both conventional and unconventional measures, as 
appropriate. 
 • to emphasise credit quality as well as credit delivery, in particular, for 
employment-intensive sectors, while pursuing financial inclusion. 
Monetary Measures 
• Bank Rate kept unchanged at 6.0 per cent. 
• Reverse Repo Rate and Repo Rate kept unchanged at 6.00 per cent and 
7.75 per cent, respectively. 
• The Reserve Bank retains the option to conduct overnight repo or longer 
term repo under the LAF depending on market conditions and other 
relevant factors. The Reserve Bank will continue to use this flexibility 
including the right to accept or reject tender(s) under the LAF, wholly or 
partially, if deemed fit, so as to make efficient use of the LAF in daily 
liquidity management. 
• Cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks increased to 8.25 per cent 
with effect from the fortnight beginning May 24, 2008. 
 
Developmental and Regulatory Policies 
 
Financial Markets 
 
• Issuances of Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs) to be considered at an 
appropriate time taking into account market conditions. 
 
• The modalities for implementing the recommendations of the Internal 
Working Group to review the auction procedure for the Government 
securities are being worked out. 
 
• Wider dissemination of the investor friendly features of the regulations 
under the Government Securities Act, 2006 through media publicity 
and the website of the Reserve Bank for better customer service. 
 
• A module of the NDS auction for non-competitive bidding scheme in the 
auctions of State Development Loans (SDLs) being developed by the 
CCIL is expected to become functional by September 2008. 
 
• Action on the recommendations of the Working Group on Interest Rate 
Futures would be initiated on the basis of the feedback received. 
 
• With the enactment of the Government Securities Act, 2006 effective 
from December 1, 2007, it is proposed to introduce STRIPS in 
Government securities by the end of 2008-09. • A settlement mechanism in Government securities through settlement 
banks for participants who do not maintain current accounts but 
maintain SGL accounts with the Reserve Bank to be operationalised in 
May 2008.  
 
• To allow access to NDS-OM extended to investors such as other non-
deposit taking NBFCs, corporates and FIIs through the CSGL route.  
 
• Following the enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 
2007, a clearing and settlement arrangement for OTC rupee 
derivatives to be put in place in consultation with the CCIL.  
 
• Introduction of repo in corporate bonds to be considered once the 
prerequisites like efficient price discovery through greater public 
issuances and secondary market trading, and an efficient and safe 
settlement system, based on Delivery versus Payments (DvP) III and 
Straight Through Processing (STP), are met. 
 
• To permit domestic crude oil refining companies to hedge their 
commodity price risk exposures on the basis of underlying contracts 
which are linked to international prices on overseas 
exchanges/markets on the basis of their past performance up to 50 per 
cent of the volume of actual imports during the previous year or 50 per 
cent of the average volume of imports during the previous three 
financial yeas, whichever is higher. 
 
• Currency futures to be introduced in the eligible exchanges in 
consultation with the SEBI; the broad framework to be finalised by the 
end of May 2008; RBI-SEBI Standing Technical Committee has been 
set up to advise on operational aspects.   
 
• Indian companies allowed to invest overseas in energy and natural 
resources sectors such as oil, gas, coal and mineral ores in excess of 
the current limits with prior approval of the Reserve Bank.   
 
• Indian parties may approach the Reserve Bank for capitalisation of 
export proceeds for exports outstanding beyond the prescribed period 
of realisation.  
 
• To permit authorised dealer (AD) banks to write off, in addition to claims 
settled by the Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (ECGC), 
the outstanding export bills settled by other insurance companies which 
are regulated by the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority 
(IRDA). 
 
• To enhance the present period for realisation and repatriation to India 
of the full export value of goods or software exported from six months 
to twelve months from the date of export, subject to review after one 
year. 
 Credit Delivery  
 
• With effect from April 2009, the shortfall in lending to weaker sections 
by the domestic SCBs would be taken into account for the purpose of 
allocating amounts for contribution to RIDF or funds with other financial 
institutions as specified by the Reserve Bank.  
 
• RRBs to be allowed to sell loan assets held by them under priority 
sector categories in excess of the prescribed priority sector lending 
target of 60 per cent, to enable greater flow of credit to this sector. 
 
• Pending finalisation of action on the recommendations of the 
Radhakrishna Committee, it is proposed to ask each domestic 
commercial bank, including RRBs, to select one district for introduction, 
on a pilot basis, of a simplified cyclical credit product for farmers to 
enable them to continuously utilise a core component of 20 per cent of 
the credit limit to ensure minimum year-round liquidity as long as the 
interest is serviced. 
 
• A simplified procedure for crop loans to landless labourers, share 
croppers, tenant farmers and oral lessees to be introduced whereby 
banks can accept an affidavit giving details of land tilled/crops grown 
by such persons for loans up to Rs.50,000 without any need for 
independent certification. Banks could also encourage the Joint 
Liability Group (JLG)/SHG mode of lending for such persons.  
 
• In collaboration with the Indian Banks' Association (IBA), the Banking 
Codes and Standards Board of India (BSCBI) is evolving a banking 
code for small and micro enterprises. 
 
• The report of the Working Group to examine the feasibility of reviving 
sick SMEs and to suggest remedial measures for potentially viable sick 
units placed on the Reserve Bank's website for wider 
dissemination/response.  
 
• A Working Group constituted to prepare RRBs to adopt appropriate 
technology and migrate to core banking solution to submit its report by 
June 30, 2008.  
 
• For 100 per cent financial inclusion, 277 districts identified and target 
achieved in 134 districts in 18 States and five Union Territories.  
 
• Banks to be permitted to classify 100 per cent of the credit outstanding 
under General Credit Card (GCC) from 50 per cent earlier, and 
overdrafts up to Rs.25,000 against 'no-frills' accounts in rural and semi-
urban areas as indirect finance to agriculture under the priority sector. 
 
• A concept paper on Financial Literacy and Counselling Centres has 
been prepared and placed on the Reserve Bank's website on April 3, 
2008 for public feedback. 
 • A High Level Committee to review the Lead Bank Scheme expected to 
submit its report by July 2008.  
 
• In order to promote an incentive system for greater flow and efficient 
allocation of credit, an Internal Working Group to be set up to look at 
issues relating to credit delivery, credit pricing and credit culture in a 
holistic manner.  
 
• With a view to bringing about greater transparency, the Reserve Bank 
is in the process of collecting details of various charges levied by banks 
for public dissemination. 
• In order to ensure that all bank branches provide better customer 
services to members of public at bank counters for exchange of notes, 
it is proposed to introduce a scheme of incentives and penalties for 
bank branches (including currency chests), based on their performance 
in rendering such services. 
 
Prudential Measures 
 
• In case of infrastructure projects to be financed by banks, the date of 
completion of the project should be clearly spelt out at the time of 
financial closure of the project and if the date of commencement of 
commercial production extends beyond a period of two years (as 
against the current norm of one year) after the date of completion of 
the project as originally envisaged, the account should be treated as 
sub-standard. The revised instructions are effective from March 31, 
2008. 
 
• In view of the recent developments in the global financial markets and 
for ensuring financial stability, it is proposed to review current 
stipulations regarding conversion factors, risk weights and provisioning 
requirements for specific off-balance sheet exposures of banks and 
prescribe prudential requirements and place guidelines on the Reserve 
Bank's website by May 15, 2008.  
 
• Banks are required to review their advances to traders in agricultural 
commodities to ensure that bank finance is not used for hoarding and 
forward the first such review to the Reserve Bank by May 15, 2008 for 
carrying out supervisory review of banks' exposure to the commodity 
sector.  
 
• The limit of bank loans for housing enhanced from Rs.20 lakh to Rs.30 
lakh for applicability of reduced risk weights at 50 per cent. 
 
• The Reserve Bank would complete the processing of applications for 
setting up Credit Information Companies by June 30, 2008.  
• The Reserve Bank has constituted an Internal Technical Group to 
propose criteria for the applicability of Basel norms to State 
Cooperative Banks/District Central Cooperative Banks/Regional Rural 
Banks that is expected to submit its report by June 30, 2008. 
 
• An Internal Working Group constituted by the Reserve Bank is currently 
studying the cross-country practices, including the legal issues to be 
laid down towards the road-map for adoption of a suitable framework 
for cross-border supervision and supervisory cooperation with 
overseas regulators, consistent with the framework envisaged in the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.   
 
• As proposed in the Mid-Term Review of October 2007, realignment of 
various internal supervisory processes for implementing an enhanced 
consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates would be 
completed by August 31, 2008.  
 
• The Reserve Bank to constitute a Working Group to study and 
recommend a suitable supervisory framework for activities of 
SPVs/Trusts set up by banks. 
 
• An inter-departmental group set up to study impact assessment, 
periodic reviews of horizontal risks across the system, inclusion of 
supervisory review process prescribed under Pillar 2 of Basel II 
framework in the Risk-based supervision (RBS) assessment besides 
simplifying the existing system of risk profiling for an appropriate RBS 
framework.    
 
• The Reserve Bank has constituted an inter-departmental Group to 
review the existing regulatory and supervisory framework for overseas 
operations of Indian banks, the introduction of new products and 
processes, increasing off-balance sheet exposures including derivative 
products, and also to recommend appropriate changes, including off-
site reporting systems. 
 
• On the Financial Stability Forum's (FSF) Report in April 2008 regarding 
strengthening of prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk 
management, enhancing transparency and valuation, changing the role 
and uses of credit ratings, strengthening the authorities' 
responsiveness to risk and implementing robust arrangements for 
dealing with stress in the financial system, the Reserve Bank had put in 
place regulatory guidelines covering many aspects and action being 
initiated on others. 
 
• The Reserve Bank has undertaken a detailed process of identifying the 
eligible credit rating agencies whose ratings may be used by banks for 
assigning risk weights for credit risk consistently for each type of claim, 
for both risk weighting and risk management purposes. 
 • A Working Group to lay down a road-map for adoption of a suitable 
framework for cross-border supervision and supervisory cooperation 
with overseas regulators, consistent with the framework envisaged in 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has been 
constituted in March 2008. 
 
Institutional Developments 
 
• Following the enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 
2007, the Reserve Bank has placed the draft regulations under the 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 on its website inviting 
public comments latest by May 15, 2008 to finalise regulations in 
consultation with the Government of India. 
 
• Banks are urged to ensure that security of banking transactions is 
adequately addressed while using IT-based products such as smart 
cards, hand held devices and secured message transfers.  
 
• The Reserve Bank has extended the waiver of processing charges for 
ECS / EFT / NEFT up to March 31, 2009.  
 
• The Reserve Bank is formulating draft guidelines for mobile payment 
systems in India to be placed on its website by June 15, 2008.  
 
• Effective April 1, 2008 all payment transactions of Rs. one crore and 
above in the money, Government securities and foreign exchange 
markets and the regulated entities (banks, PDs and NBFCs) have been 
made mandatory to be routed through the electronic payment 
mechanism.  
 
• A Working Group to be constituted comprising representatives of the 
Reserve Bank, Central/State Governments and the UCB sector to 
suggest measures, including the appropriate regulatory and 
supervisory framework, to facilitate emergence of umbrella 
organisation(s) for the UCB sector in the respective States.  
 
• To dispense with the extant eligibility norms for opening on-site ATMs 
for well-managed and financially sound UCBs in the States that have 
signed MoUs with the Reserve Bank and registered under the Multi-
State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002.  
 
• With a view to liberalising and rationalising the branch licensing norms 
for UCBs, approvals for branch expansion, including off-site ATMs to 
be considered, based on annual business plans, subject to 
maintenance of minimum CRAR of 10 per cent on a continuing basis 
and other regulatory comfort.  
 
• To dispense with the minimum net worth criteria for undertaking 
insurance business provided other criteria as prescribed from time to 
time are met.  
 • To increase the extant limit on individual housing loans from Rs.25 lakh 
to a maximum of Rs.50 lakh in respect of Tier-II UCBs, subject to 
certain conditions. 
 
• In the light of international developments and increasing bank exposure 
to these systemically important NBFCs, to review the regulations in 
respect of capital adequacy, liquidity and disclosure norms and issue 
revised instructions by May 31, 2008. 
 
• As part of the progress made by the Committee on Financial Sector 
Assessment (CFSA), the four Advisory Panels constituted by the 
Committee have prepared their draft reports. The reports of the CFSA 
as also those of Advisory Panels are expected to be finalised by end-
June 2008 and will be placed thereafter on the Reserve Bank's 
website. 
                                                                                                                
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
 
Press Release: 2007-2008/1396 