` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 22,1998 
INTRODUCTION 
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks  
Background  
1.01 There has been an increase in the flow of credit to the agricultural sector from Rs.11,202 crore by all agencies in 
1991-92 to Rs.28,653 crore in 1996-97, and to an estimated Rs.34,274 crore in 1997-98. This has been possible on 
account of more refinance extended by NABARD to rural financial institutions, Reserve bank's increased support by 
way of General Line of Credit to NABARD for short-term credit and the introduction of Special Agricultural Credit Plans 
by commercial banks for this sector. The Reserve Bank has played a central role in motivating commercial banks to 
place a special emphasis on agriculture. In spite of these initiatives, there is a perception that investments in agriculture 
have not kept pace with demand.  
1.02 In the context of the priority accorded to agriculture, and also to give an impetus to the flow of credit, the Reserve 
Bank of India set up a one man High Level Committee of Shri R.V.Gupta in December 1997 to suggest measures for 
improving the delivery systems as well as simplification of procedures for agricultural credit. The committee's mandate 
was to identify the constraints faced by commercial banks in increasing the flow of credit, introducing new products and 
services, and simplifying procedures and methods of working with a view to enabling rural borrowers to access 
adequate and timely credit from the commercial banking system.  
1.03 The Committee was asked to visit select branches and regional offices of commercial banks, get a feedback from 
agriculturists, farmer - borrowers, agricultural scientists, extension workers as well as field level staff and make 
proposals for further initiatives that could be taken by commercial banks for streamlining the delivery of farm credit.  
Terms of Reference  
1.04 The terms of reference of the Committee were as follows:  
1. To study the working of the credit delivery system for agriculture through field level interaction with farmers, 
agriculturists, borrowers of commercial banks and bank staff and analyse the constraints in the flow of such credit to the 
farm sector.  
2. To make suggestions for simplification and improvements in systems and procedures including reduction in paper 
work for delivery of farm credit.  
3. To make proposals on other initiatives that may be taken by commercial banks to facilitate credit delivery to the 
farm sector.  
Time Frame 
  
1.05 The Committee was required to give its recommendations to the RBI by March 1998. In view, however, of the 
announcement of elections to the Lok Sabha, the Committee was required to reschedule its field visits to some States. 
As a result, the Committee was granted extension of time upto the end of April 1998 but submitted its report on April 21, 
1998.  
 
Structure of the Report  
 
1.06 The report consists of seven chapters:  
• The first chapter deals with the Committee's terms of reference and related matters.  
• The approach formulated and the methodology adopted by the Committee are dealt with in the second chapter.  • The third chapter briefly reviews recommendations made by earlier Committees on the subject.  
• The fourth chapter presents an overview of policy.  
• The fifth chapter deals with the present arrangements for agricultural credit.  
• Chapter six delineates the commIttee's views on various operational and procedural issues including simplification 
of documentation, suggested financial products and supportive measures.  
• The seventh chapter sets forth the committee's recommendations on major policy related issues.  
• In order to facilitate the reading of the report, a summary of the major recommendations has been added at the end 
of the report.  
Acknowledgements  
 
1.07 The Committee would like to acknowledge its gratitude to :  
• Farmers from different States who met the Committee and gave it the benefit of their sound counsel and advice.  
• Officials of the Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and who interacted with the Committee and acquainted it with their views.  
• Commercial banks - both public sector and private - who provided support in terms of logistics, information inputs 
and clarifications on various issues raised. But for their co-operation - given freely and without reserve - it would not 
have been possible for the Committee to complete its task in the time assigned.  
• The support and input received from self-help groups and NGOs.  
The Committee wishes to express its appreciation of the able assistance received from Shri J.P. Ratna Rao of Rural 
Planning & Credit Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai and Shri S. Ghosh, Shri D.P. Taneja and 
Smt. Savithri Sridhara of the New Delhi Office of the RBI and Smt. Vijaya Awati of Kolhapur in the 
preparation/presentation of the report.  
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks 