October 31, 1998
exporters and suggest improvements. The other members of the Group are:
Sr.No.
1.
2. Shri A.K.S.Rao
3.
4. Director and Head,
5.
6.
are:
(i)   to study the procedures and working of the credit delivery system for exports,
timely fashion for exports.
India by December, 1998.
P. V. Sadanandan
Press Release : 1998-99/559
Asstt. Manager
3. The Committee has been requested to give its recommendations to the Reserve Bank of
(iii)   to make any other proposals which may improve the delivery of credit in a
(EEFC) Accounts and to remove procedural problems, if any; and
(ii)   to review the operation of the scheme of Exchange Earners Foreign Currency
non-fund based services to exporters;
reducing the repetitive documentation requirements and to improve the quality of
including those in respect of foreign currency loans and to make suggestions for
members and also obtain views of special invitees. The terms of reference for the Committee
the exporters as well as the field level bank staff. The Working Group may co-opt additional
where the small and medium size exporters are located. They will also get a feed-back from
regional offices of the commercial banks in some of the major exporting centres especially
2. For purposes of the study, the Working Group members will visit select branches and
(Member Secretary)
Reserve Bank of India General Manager Shri M.T.Pabari
Vysya Bank Adviser Shri K.R.V.Bhat
International Services
ANZ Grindlays Bank PLC Shri Soumen Basu
Bank of India General Manager Shri R.N.Buch
Canara Bank General Manager
State Bank of India Chief General Manager Shri H.Lal
Name of Bank Designation Name
India in order to improve the procedures for credit delivery, to review facilities available to
the chairmanship of Shri V.Subrahmanyam, currently Executive Director, Reserve Bank of
The Reserve Bank of India today announced the decision to set up a Working Group under
other facilities to exporters
procedure for provision of credit and
to improve delivery systems and simplify
RBI sets up a Working Group of Bankers