` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
January 2, 1998 
 
RBI announces New Regulatory Framework for NBFCs: Protection of Depositors' 
Interest and More Effective Supervision at the Centre of New Policy 
 
Financial Companies (NBFCs) particularly those which accept public deposits. For this 
purpose, RBI has drawn necessary powers under the provisions of RBI (Amendment) 
Act, 1997. The regulations stipulate an upper limit of public deposit which NBFCs can 
accept. This limit is linked to the credit rating of an approved rating agency. An upper 
limit has also been put on the rate of interest on deposits in order to restrain NBFCs from 
offering incentives and mobilise excessive deposits which they may not be able to 
service. Furthermore, disclosure requirements have been strengthened and 
responsibilities have been cast on the Board of Directors and auditors of the companies 
to ensure that the operations of NBFCs conform to the deposit regulations and 
prudential norms prescribed by RBI. The salient features of the new regulatory 
framework are as under : -  
1. Categorisation of companies  
For the purpose of the new regulations, NBFCs have been divided into three 
broad categories as indicated below:  
i. NBFCs accepting public deposits;  
ii. NBFCs not accepting public deposit and are engaged in loan, investment, 
hire purchase finance and equipment leasing activities; and  
iii. NBFCs not accepting public deposit and have acquired shares/securities 
in their own group/holding/ subsidiary companies of not less than 90 per 
cent of their total assets and are not trading in these shares/securities.  
While NBFCs accepting public deposits will be subjected to all the 
provisions of the Directions, those which do not accept public deposits will 
be supervised in a limited manner.  
2. Definition of Public Deposits  
The term `public deposit' has been defined on the lines of the definition provided 
in the Companies (Acceptance of Deposits) Rules, 1975 framed under the 
Companies Act, 1956 and the Reserve Bank of India Act. Public deposit will 
include fixed, recurring etc. deposit received from public, deposit received from 
relatives and friends, deposit from shareholders by a public limited company and 
the money raised by issue of unsecured debentures/bonds. Public deposits 
would, however, exclude money raised by NBFCs by way of issue of secured debentures/bonds, borrowings from banks/financial institutions, deposit from 
directors, inter-corporate deposit (ICD), deposit received from foreign citizens 
and those received by the private limited companies from their shareholders.  
3. Prohibition from accepting public deposit for NBFCs having Net Owned 
Fund (NOF) of less than Rs. 25 lakh  
The NBFCs having net owned fund of less than Rs. 25 lakh will not be entitled to 
accept deposit from public. However, they can raise borrowings from other 
sources.  
4. Credit rating requirement and quantum of public deposit  
The ceiling on quantum of public deposit for an NBFC has been linked to its level 
of credit rating as given by approved credit rating agencies. Higher credit rating 
will entitle NBFCs to raise larger quantum of public deposit as per details given 
hereunder :  
Level of credit Equipment leasing/Hire purchase Loan and Investment 
rating Cos. Cos. 
 (As a multiple of NOF) 
AAA  3 times 2 times 
AA  2 times  1 time 
A  1 time 0.5 time 
NBFCs having a credit rating lower than `A' cannot accept public deposit. Those 
NBFCs which have accepted public deposit in excess of the prescribed limits 
have been allowed time upto December 31, 1998 to regularise their position.  
5. Interest Rate Ceiling  
All the NBFCs have now been subjected to the interest rate ceiling of 16 per cent 
per annum. NBFCs which are presently offering interest rates in excess of the 
prescribed ceiling are required to roll back their interest rate to bring it within the 
ceiling with immediate effect.  
6. Brokerage  
Brokerage payable by NBFCs on deposit of one year to five years has now been 
uniformly fixed at two per cent as against the varying rates earlier. In addition, 
NBFCs may also pay to the brokers by way of reimbursement on the basis of 
vouchers/bills produced an amount not exceeding 0.5 per cent of the deposits 
collected.   
7. Submission of Returns  
NBFCs accepting public deposits only will be required to submit to RBI annual 
statutory returns and financial statements. NBFCs not accepting public deposit 
are exempted from this requirement.  
8. Compliance of Prudential Norms  
(i) The NBFCs including Residuary Non-Banking Companies accepting 
public deposit will be required to comply with all the prudential norms 
encompassing income recognition, accounting standards, asset 
classification, provisioning for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy 
and credit/investment concentration. Prudential norms have been revised 
to make them more transparent and have been reissued in the form of 
directions to make them mandatory. Some of the important changes 
made in the norms are mentioned below.  
Income recognition norms for lease and hire purchase assets  
a. The income recognition, asset classification and provisioning 
norms as applicable to lease and hire purchase assets have been 
relaxed having regard to their distinctive nature. Hitherto, such 
assets were to be treated as NPAs in case the lease rentals and 
hire purchase instalments remained past due for six months. In 
terms of new norms, such assets will be classified as NPAs if the 
said instalments are overdue for 12 months and above.  
Capital Adequacy Ratio  
b. Capital Adequacy requirement for NBFCs with Net Owned Fund of 
Rs.25 lakh and above and accepting public deposits has been 
raised from the present level of 8 per cent to 10 per cent to be 
achieved by March 31, 1998 and to 12 per cent by March 31, 
1999.  
Credit/Investment Concentration Norms  
c. While the existing credit concentration norms to a single borrower 
and a group of borrowers at 15 and 25 per cent of the owned fund 
remain unchanged, the investment concentration norms have 
been modified. It has been prescribed that investment in a single 
company or in a single group of companies should not exceed 15 
and 25 per cent respectively of the NBFC's Owned Fund. Further, 
composite limits of credit and investment by an NBFC in a single 
entity and a single group of entities have been prescribed at 25 
per cent and 40 per cent respectively of its Owned Fund.  Prohibition from grant of loan by an NBFC against the security of 
its own shares  
d. NBFCs have been advised not to grant any loan against the 
security of its own shares. Any such loan granted so far should be 
repaid in due course. However, no fresh loan should be granted 
against such security.  
Details of the norms have been separately issued to the 
companies.  
e. The NBFCs which are accepting and holding public deposits only 
are required to submit half-yearly prudential returns. These returns 
will be duly certified by their auditors. The NBFCs engaged in 
leasing, hire purchase finance, loan and investment activities and 
not accepting public deposits are required to comply with 
prudential norms other than norms on capital adequacy and 
credit/investment concentration. They will, however, not be 
required to submit the prudential norm return to RBI. The 
investment companies holding not less than 90 per cent of their 
assets being the securities of their group/ holding/subsidiary 
companies and not accepting public deposits are exempted from 
the prudential norms.  
 
9. Maintenance of liquid assets  
The liquid asset requirement will now be applicable to public deposits only. The 
ratio of liquid assets shall also be uniform for all NBFCs accepting public deposits 
at 12.5 and 15.0 per cent effective from April 1, 1998 and April 1, 1999 
respectively.  
10. Application forms for deposit acceptance  
The contents of the deposit application forms have been further modified to make 
the depositors aware of the fora available for redressal of their grievances and 
also to give them a proper perspective regarding the role and responsibility of the 
regulatory authority. The deposit taking companies have been directed to certify 
the correctness of their financial position and confirm that their operations comply 
with Reserve Bank's directions. The depositors have also been enjoined to 
satisfy themselves about the financial details of the company before placing their 
deposits, and to declare on the deposit application form that they have gone 
through the declarations made by the company regarding its conformity with the 
RBI regulations.  
11. Regulations for NBFCs not accepting Public Deposits  
The NBFCs not accepting/holding public deposits shall be regulated in a limited 
manner. These companies are exempt from all the provisions of directions 
relating to acceptance of public deposits and the requirements of capital 
adequacy as also credit/concentration norms. However, in order to avail of the 
exemptions from the regulations, these NBFCs are required to get a resolution passed by their board of directors to the effect that they will not accept any 
`public deposit'. The Board resolution in the case of Investment Companies not 
accepting public deposits and which have acquired shares of not less than 90 per 
cent of their assets in their group/holding/subsidiary companies will also 
specifically include the names of their holding/group/ subsidiary companies 
whose shares/securities they hold or propose to invest during the ensuing year. It 
will be the duty of the statutory auditors to comment in their report that these 
companies have not accepted public deposit and have complied with the 
specified norms. Any violation/non-compliance is required to be reported by the 
statutory auditors to Reserve Bank of India by exception.  
12. Auditor's Certificate  
The scope of the Auditor's Certificate appended to the returns on prudential 
norms has been widened to include certain aspects of supervisory concerns to 
Reserve Bank and also to ensure correct reporting of data.  
13. Classification of NBFCs  
i. Reserve Bank has also made certain refinements in the norms for 
classification of NBFCs into various sub-groups based on their principal 
activity as evidenced from the asset/income pattern. Having regard to the 
special regulatory dispensation accorded to equipment leasing and hire 
purchase finance companies, the criteria for classification of the NBFCs 
into these categories has been tightened. Thus, an NBFC to be eligible 
for being classified as equipment leasing company or a hire purchase 
finance company shall have not less than sixty per cent of its assets and 
shall derive not less than sixty per cent of its income from equipment 
leasing and hire purchase activities taken together.  
 
ii. All new NBFCs incorporated after January 9, 1997 will be provisionally 
classified as loan or investment companies for a period of one year and 
the classification will be reviewed thereafter on the basis of their 
asset/income pattern as disclosed in their balance sheet/profit and loss 
account and other related aspects. Existing NBFCs as also those which 
remain unclassified will be classified on the basis of their principal activity 
as evidenced from their financial statements into various categories such 
as Equipment Leasing Companies. Hire Purchase Finance Companies, 
Loan Companies, Investment Companies, Miscellaneous Non-Banking 
Companies or Residuary Non-Banking Companies as the case may be. 
Only such of the NBFCs as have been specifically notified under section 
620A of the Companies Act, 1956 by the Government of India, will be 
classified as Nidhi Companies. NBFCs which have been incorporated 
with the intention to function as Nidhis will be classified as Loan 
Companies and the directions as applicable to `Loan Companies' will be 
made applicable to them till such notification.   
14. Depositors Cautioned  
Reserve Bank has cautioned the depositors that whatever be the rigours of 
regulation, the regulations by themselves cannot provide a fail-safe system for 
ensuring repayment of deposit. Depositors should, therefore, be circumspect and 
satisfy themselves about the financial soundness and health of the companies 
before placing their deposits keeping in mind that they are investing their money 
at their own risk and responsibility.  
Note: The copies of notifications on  
i. deposit acceptance;  
ii. prudential norms;  
iii. liquid asset requirement and  
iv. aspects to be commented upon by auditors, are available on internet at : 
http://www.rbi.org.in  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/572  
 