` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
Jan 13, 1998 
Notification  No.F.E.R.A.180/98-RB dated 13th January 1998  Permission for issue 
of equity shares to foreign investors under Automatic Route of Reserve Bank 
In pursuance of clause (a) and clause (d) of sub- Section (1) of Section 19 read with 
clause (b) of sub- Section (1) of Section 29 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
1973 (46 of 1973), the Reserve Bank is pleased to permit a company incorporated in 
India -  
a. Which engaged or proposing to engage in an activity specified in the list for the 
time being in force published by the Ministry of Industry, Government of India, as 
Annexure III to the Statement on Industrial Policy, 1991 (hereinafter referred to 
as " the said Annexure III" ); or  
b. which is a Trading Company primarily engaged in export, and is registered as an 
Export/Trading/Star Trading House, with the Ministry of Commerce, Government 
of India,  
to issue equity shares subject to the conditions mentioned in para 3, to a person who is 
not a citizen of India (whether resident in India or not) or to a company (other than a 
banking company) which is not incorporated under any law in force in India, and to send 
such shares out of India, to their place of residence or incorporation as the case may be; 
Provided that a company, existing on the date of this Notification,which is not engaged in 
the said Annexure III activities shall be eligible to issue shares, if it embarks upon 
expansion programme predominantly in the said Annexure III activities, subject to the 
condition that the foreign equity raised by issue of equity shares to foreign investor is 
utilised for such expansion;  
Provided further that in the case of a newly set-up Trading Company primarily engaged 
in export, issue of shares shall be subject to the condition that registration as an Export/ 
Trading/Star Trading House is obtained before remittance of dividend to the foreign 
investor.  
 
2. The general permission granted herein shall not apply to or in respect of -  
a. person who is a citizen of, or a company incorported in, Pakistan or Bangladesh;  
b. a company being -  
i. manufacturer of items reserved for small scale sector;  
ii. unit manufacturing items which require industrial licence ;  
iii. unit manufacturing any item of aerospace and defence equipments 
whether specifically mentioned or not; and  iv. unit manufacturing any item related to production or use of atomic energy 
including carrying out of any process, preparatory or ancillary to such 
production or use, under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962;  
v. 100% Export oriented unit and unit in Export processing zones.  
3. The general permission granted herein to issue shares (hereinafter referred to as 
"foreign investment " ) is subject to the following conditions, namely:  
i. the foreign investment shall not in aggregate exceed 50%, 51% or 74% of the 
equity capital of the issuer company, as indicated in the said Annexure III;  
ii. where the issuer company is a Trading Company, foreign investment therein 
shall not exceed 51% of its equity capital;  
iii. in the case of issue of shares by an existing Company,  
a. Board Resolution has been passed in connection with preferential 
allotment of shares, if any, to foreign investor, indicating the issue price;  
b. Special Resolution has been passed under Section 81(1A) of the 
Companies Act, 1956, wherever applicable, in connection with such 
preferential allotment, indicating the issue price;  
c. in the case of a listed company, the price for the issue is worked out 
according to SEBI guidelines and is duly certified by the Company's 
statutory auditors; and in the case of any other company, calculation of 
fair value of shares (as per erstwhile CCI guidelines) is made by an 
independent Chartered Accountant; 
iv. approval, wherever necessary, from any authority, statutory or otherwise, 
required for the project, is obtained by the company;  
v. payment for the shares to be issued to the foreign investor has been received by 
remittance from abroad through normal banking channels;  
vi. remittance of dividend in respect of industries specified in the Annexure hereto, 
shall be subject to the condition of balancing of dividend over a period of seven 
years to be reckoned in the case of an existing company, from the date of issue 
of shares, and in any other cases,from the date of commencement of production;  
vii. no disinvestment of shares by the foreign investor shall be made without the 
previous permission of the Reserve Bank;  
viii. the issuer company files with the Regional Office of Reserve Bank, not later than 
thirty days from the date of issue, the following -  
a. one copy of Form FC (RBI) duly completed containing NIC code and 
description of activity in accordance with the said Annexure III;  
b. original Foreign Inward Remittance Certificate (FIRC) evidencing receipt 
of funds;  
c. Memorandum and Articles of Association of the issuer company;  
d. original certificate by a Chartered Accountant, containing particulars of 
shares issued, date of issue, number of shares, and the issue price;  
e. certified copy each of Board Resolution, Special Resolution, Statutory 
Auditor's Certificate, or the Chartered Accountant's calculation, referred to 
in para 3(iii) above;   
f. such other particulars and documents as may be required or specified by 
the Reserve Bank from time to time.  
(C. Harikumar) 
Executive Director 
ANNEXURE  
(See para 3(vi) of the Notification) 
LIST OF 22 SPECIFIED INDUSTRIES IN THE CONSUMER GOODS SECTOR IN 
WHICH DIVIDEND BALANCING IS APPLICABLE  
1. Manufacture of food and food products.  
2. Manufacture of dairy products.  
3. Grain mill products.  
4. Manufacture of bakery proucts.  
5. Manufacture and refining of sugar (vacuum pan sugar factories).  
6. Production of common salt.  
7. Manufacture of Hydrogenated oil (Vanaspati).  
8. Tea processing.  
9. Coffee.  
10. Manufacture of beverages, tobacco and tobacco products.  
11. Distilling, rectifying and blending of spirits, wine industries, malt liquors and malt, 
production of country liquors and toddy.  
12. Soft drinks and carbonated water industry.  
13. Manufacture of Cigar, Cigarettes, Cheroot and cigarette tobacco.  
14. Manufacture of wood and wood products, furniture and fixtures.  
15. Manufacture of leather and fur/leather products.  
16. Tanning, curing, finishing, embossing and japanning of leather.  
17. Manufacture of footwear (excluding repair) except vulcanized for moulded rubber 
or plastic footwear.  
18. Manufacture of footwear made primarily of vulcanized or moulded products.  
19. Prophylactics (rubber contraceptive).  
20. Motor cars.  
21. Entertainment Electronics (VCRs, Colour TVs, CD Players, Tape Recorders).  
22. White goods (Domestic Refrigerators, Domestic Dishwashing Machines, 
Programmable Domestic Washing Machines, Microwave Ovens, 
Airconditioners).  
Note:- Remittance of dividend should be covered by earn ings of the company from 
export of items covered by the foreign collaboration agreement. Remittance of dividend 
can also be covered from earnings through export of items not mentioned in the 
agreement provided these are in the list of industries mentioned in the said Annexure III. 
The amount of dividend payment may be covered by export earnings of such items 
recorded in years prior to the payment of dividend or in the year of payment of dividend. 