Asset - Liability Management System in banks - Guidelines
Over the last few years the Indian financial markets have witnessed wide ranging changes at fast
pace. Intense competition for business involving both the assets and liabilities, together with
increasing volatility in the domestic interest rates as well as foreign exchange rates, has brought
pressure on the management of banks to maintain a good balance among spreads, profitability and
long-term viability. These pressures call for structured and comprehensive measures and not just
ad hoc action. The Management of banks has to base their business decisions on a dynamic and
integrated risk management system and process, driven by corporate strategy. Banks are exposed
to several major risks in the course of their business - credit risk, interest rate risk, foreign
exchange risk, equity / commodity price risk, liquidity risk and operational risks.
2.     This note lays down broad guidelines in respect of interest rate and liquidity risks
management systems in banks which form part of the Asset-Liability Management (ALM)
function. The initial focus of the ALM function would be to enforce the risk management
discipline viz. managing business after assessing the risks involved. The objective of good risk
management programmes should be that these programmes will evolve into a strategic tool for
bank management.
3.     The ALM process rests on three pillars:
• ALM information systems
=> Management Information System
=> Information availability, accuracy, adequacy and expediency
• ALM organisation
=> Structure and responsibilities
=> Level of top management involvement
• ALM process
=> Risk parameters
=> Risk identification
=> Risk measurement
=> Risk management
=> Risk policies and tolerance levels.
4.     ALM information systems
Information is the key to the ALM process. Considering the large network of branches and the
lack of an adequate system to collect information required for ALM which analyses information
on the basis of residual maturity and behavioural pattern it will take time for banks in the present
state to get the requisite information. The problem of ALM needs to be addressed by following an
ABC approach i.e. analysing the behaviour of asset and liability products in the top branches
accounting for significant business and then making rational assumptions about the way in which
assets and liabilities would behave in other branches. In respect of foreign exchange, investment
portfolio and money market operations, in view of the centralised nature of the functions, it wouldbe much easier to collect reliable information. The data and assumptions can then be refined over
time as the bank management gain experience of conducting business within an ALM framework.
The spread of computerisation will also help banks in accessing data.
5.     ALM organisation
5.1    a)     The Board should have overall responsibility for management of risks and should
decide the risk management policy of the bank and set limits for liquidity, interest rate, foreign
exchange and equity price risks.
        b)     The Asset - Liability Committee (ALCO) consisting of the bank's senior management
including CEO should be responsible for ensuring adherence to the limits set by the Board as well
as for deciding the business strategy of the bank (on the assets and liabilities sides) in line with the
bank's budget and decided risk management objectives.
       c)     The ALM desk consisting of operating staff should be responsible for analysing,
monitoring and reporting the risk profiles to the ALCO. The staff should also prepare forecasts
(simulations) showing the effects of various possible changes in market conditions related to the
balance sheet and recommend the action needed to adhere to bank's internal limits.
5.2    The ALCO is a decision making unit responsible for balance sheet planning from risk -
return perspective including the strategic management of interest rate and liquidity risks. Each
bank will have to decide on the role of its ALCO, its responsibility as also the decisions to be
taken by it. The business and risk management strategy of the bank should ensure that the bank
operates within the limits / parameters set by the Board. The business issues that an ALCO would
consider, inter alia, will include product pricing for both deposits and advances, desired maturity
profile of the incremental assets and liabilities, etc. In addition to monitoring the risk levels of the
bank, the ALCO should review the results of and progress in implementation of the decisions
made in the previous meetings. The ALCO would also articulate the current interest rate view of
the bank and base its decisions for future business strategy on this view. In respect of the funding
policy, for instance, its responsibility would be to decide on source and mix of liabilities or sale of
assets. Towards this end, it will have to develop a view on future direction of interest rate
movements and decide on a funding mix between fixed vs floating rate funds, wholesale vs retail
deposits, money market vs capital market funding, domestic vs foreign currency funding, etc.
Individual banks will have to decide the frequency for holding their ALCO meetings.
5.3    Composition of ALCO
The size (number of members) of ALCO would depend on the size of each institution, business
mix and organisational complexity. To ensure commitment of the Top Management, the
CEO/CMD or ED should head the Committee. The Chiefs of Investment, Credit, Funds
Management / Treasury (forex and domestic), International Banking and Economic Research can
be members of the Committee. In addition the Head of the Information Technology Division
should also be an invitee for building up of MIS and related computerisation. Some banks may
even have sub-committees.
5.4    Committee of DirectorsBanks should also constitute a professional Managerial and Supervisory Committee consisting of
three to four directors which will oversee the implementation of the system and review its
functioning periodically.
5.5    ALM process:
The scope of ALM function can be described as follows:
Liquidity risk management
• 
Management of market risks
• 
(including Interest Rate Risk)
Funding and capital planning
• 
Profit planning and growth projection
• 
Trading risk management
• 
The guidelines given in this note mainly address Liquidity and Interest Rate risks.
6.     Liquidity Risk Management
6.1    Measuring and managing liquidity needs are vital activities of commercial banks. By
assuring a bank's ability to meet its liabilities as they become due, liquidity management can
reduce the probability of an adverse situation developing. The importance of liquidity transcends
individual institutions, as liquidity shortfall in one institution can have repercussions on the entire
system. Bank management should measure not only the liquidity positions of banks on an ongoing
basis but also examine how liquidity requirements are likely to evolve under crisis scenarios.
Experience shows that assets Commonly considered as liquid like Government securities and
other money market instruments could also become illiquid when the market and players are
unidirectional. Therefore liquidity has to be tracked through maturity or cash flow mismatches.
For measuring and managing net funding requirements, the use of a maturity ladder and
calculation of cumulative surplus or deficit of funds at selected maturity dates is adopted as a
standard tool. The format of the Statement of Structural Liquidity is given in Annexure I.
6.2    The Maturity Profile as given in Appendix I could be used for measuring the future cash
flows of banks in different time buckets. The time buckets given the Statutory Reserve cycle of 14
days may be distributed as under:
i) 1 to 14 days
ii) 15 to 28 days
iii) 29 days and upto 3 months
iv) Over 3 months and upto 6 months
v) Over 6 months and upto 12 months
vi) Over 1 year and upto 2 years
vii) Over 2 years and upto 5 years
viii) Over 5 years6.3    Within each time bucket there could be mismatches depending on cash inflows and
outflows. While the mismatches upto one year would be relevant since these provide early
warning signals of impending liquidity problems, the main focus should be on the short-term
mismatches viz., 1-14 days and 15-28 days. Banks, however, are expected to monitor their
cumulative mismatches (running total) across all time buckets by establishing internal prudential
limits with the approval of the Board / Management Committee. The mismatch during 1-14 days
and 15-28 days should not in any case exceed 20% of the cash outflows in each time bucket. If a
bank in view of its asset -liability profile needs higher tolerance level, it could operate with higher
limit sanctioned by its Board / Management Committee giving reasons on the need for such higher
limit. A copy of the note approved by Board / Management Committee may be forwarded to the
Department of Banking Supervision, RBI. The discretion to allow a higher tolerance level is
intended for a temporary period, till the system stabilises and the bank is able to restructure its
asset -liability pattern.
6.4    The Statement of Structural Liquidity ( Annexure I ) may be prepared by placing all cash
inflows and outflows in the maturity ladder according to the expected timing of cash flows. A
maturing liability will be a cash outflow while a maturing asset will be a cash inflow. It would be
necessary to take into account the rupee inflows and outflows on account of forex operations
including the readily available forex resources ( FCNR (B) funds, etc) which can be deployed for
augmenting rupee resources. While determining the likely cash inflows / outflows, banks have to
make a number of assumptions according to their asset - liability profiles. For instance, Indian
banks with large branch network can (on the stability of their deposit base as most deposits are
renewed) afford to have larger tolerance levels in mismatches if their term deposit base is quite
high. While determining the tolerance levels the banks may take into account all relevant factors
based on their asset-liability base, nature of business, future strategy etc. The RBI is interested in
ensuring that the tolerance levels are determined keeping all necessary factors in view and further
refined with experience gained in Liquidity Management.
6.5    In order to enable the banks to monitor their short-term liquidity on a dynamic basis over a
time horizon spanning from 1-90 days, banks may estimate their short-term liquidity profiles on
the basis of business projections and other commitments. An indicative format ( Annexure III ) for
estimating Short-term Dynamic Liquidity is enclosed.
7.    Currency Risk
7.1    Floating exchange rate arrangement has brought in its wake pronounced volatility adding a
new dimension to the risk profile of banks' balance sheets. The increased capital flows across free
economies following deregulation have contributed to increase in the volume of transactions.
Large cross border flows together with the volatility has rendered the banks' balance sheets
vulnerable to exchange rate movements.
7.2    Dealing in different currencies brings opportunities as also risks. If the liabilities in one
currency exceed the level of assets in the same currency, then the currency mismatch can add
value or erode value depending upon the currency movements. The simplest way to avoidcurrency risk is to ensure that mismatches, if any, are reduced to zero or near zero. Banks
undertake operations in foreign exchange like accepting deposits, making loans and advances and
quoting prices for foreign exchange transactions. Irrespective of the strategies adopted, it may not
be possible to eliminate currency mismatches altogether. Besides, some of the institutions may
take proprietary trading positions as a conscious business strategy.
7.3    Managing Currency Risk is one more dimension of Asset- Liability Management.
Mismatched currency position besides exposing the balance sheet to movements in exchange rate
also exposes it to country risk and settlement risk. Ever since the RBI (Exchange Control
Department) introduced the concept of end of the day near square position in 1978, banks have
been setting up overnight limits and selectively undertaking active day time trading. Following the
introduction of "Guidelines for Internal Control over Foreign Exchange Business" in 1981,
maturity mismatches (gaps) are also subject to control. Following the recommendations of Expert
Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India (Sodhani Committee) the calculation of exchange
position has been redefined and banks have been given the discretion to set up overnight limits
linked to maintenance of additional Tier I capital to the extent of 5 per cent of open position limit.
7.4    Presently, the banks are also free to set gap limits with RBI's approval but are required to
adopt Value at Risk (VaR) approach to measure the risk associated with forward exposures. Thus
the open position limits together with the gap limits form the risk management approach to forex
operations. For monitoring such risks banks should follow the instructions contained in Circular
A.D (M. A. Series) No.52 dated December 27, 1997 issued by the Exchange Control
Department.
8.     Interest Rate Risk (IRR)
8.1    The phased deregulation of interest rates and the operational flexibility given to banks in
pricing most of the assets and liabilities have exposed the banking system to Interest Rate Risk.
Interest rate risk is the risk where changes in market interest rates might adversely affect a bank's
financial condition. Changes in interest rates affect both the current earnings (earnings
perspective) as also the net worth of the bank (economic value perspective). The risk from the
earnings' perspective can be measured as changes in the Net Interest Income (Nil) or Net Interest
Margin (NIM). In the context of poor MIS, slow pace of computerisation in banks and the
absence of total deregulation, the traditional Gap analysis is considered as a suitable method to
measure the Interest Rate Risk. It is the intention of RBI to move over to modern techniques of
Interest Rate Risk measurement like Duration Gap Analysis, Simulation and Value at Risk at a
later date when banks acquire sufficient expertise and sophistication in MIS. The Gap or
Mismatch risk can be measured by calculating Gaps over different time intervals as at a given
date. Gap analysis measures mismatches between rate sensitive liabilities and rate sensitive assets
(including off-balance sheet positions). An asset or liability is normally classified as rate sensitive
if:
i) within the time interval under consideration, there is a cash flow;
ii) the interest rate resets/reprices contractually during the interval;iii) RBI changes the interest rates (i.e. interest rates on Savings Bank Deposits, advances upto
Rs.2 lakhs, DRI advances, Export credit, Refinance, CRR balance, etc.) in cases where
interest rates are administered ; and
iv) it is contractually pre-payable or withdrawable before the stated maturities.
8.2    The Gap Report should be generated by grouping rate sensitive liabilities, assets and off-
balance sheet positions into time buckets according to residual maturity or next repricing period,
whichever is earlier. The difficult task in Gap analysis is determining rate sensitivity. All
investments, advances, deposits, borrowings, purchased funds etc. that mature/reprice within a
specified timeframe are interest rate sensitive. Similarly, any principal repayment of loan is also
rate sensitive if the bank expects to receive it within the time horizon. This includes final principal
payment and interim instalments. Certain assets and liabilities receive/pay rates that vary with a
reference rate. These assets and liabilities are repriced at pre-determined intervals and are rate
sensitive at the time of repricing. While the interest rates on term deposits are fixed during their
currency, the advances portfolio of the banking system is basically floating. The interest rates on
advances could be repriced any number of occasions, corresponding to the changes in PLR. The
Gaps may be identified in the following time buckets:
i) upto 1 month
ii) Over one month and upto 3 months
iii) Over 3 months and upto 6 months
iv) Over 6 months and upto 12 months
v) Over 1 year and upto 3 years
vi) Over 3 years and upto 5 years
vii) Over 5 years
viii) Non-sensitive
The various items of rate sensitive assets and liabilities in the Balance Sheet may be classified as
explained in Appendix - II and the Reporting Format for interest rate sensitive assets and
liabilities is given in Annexure II.
8.3    The Gap is the difference between Rate Sensitive Assets (RSA) and Rate Sensitive
Liabilities (RSL) for each time bucket. The positive Gap indicates that it has more RSAs than
RSLs whereas the negative Gap indicates that it has more RSLs. The Gap reports indicate
whether the institution is in a position to benefit from rising interest rates by having a positive Gap
(RSA > RSL) or whether it is in a position to benefit from declining interest rates by a negative
Gap (RSL > RSA). The Gap can, therefore, be used as a measure of interest rate sensitivity.
8.4    Each bank should set prudential limits on individual Gaps with the approval of the
Board/Management Committee. The prudential limits should have a bearing on the total assets,
earning assets or equity. The banks may work out earnings at risk, based on their views on interest
rate movements and fix a prudent level with the approval of the Board/Management Committee.8.5    RBI will also introduce capital adequacy for market risks in due course.
9.     The classification of various components of assets and liabilities into different time buckets
for preparation of Gap reports (Liquidity and Interest Rate Sensitivity) as indicated in Appendices
I & II is the benchmark. Banks which are better equipped to reasonably estimate the behavioural
pattern, embedded options, rolls-in and rolls-out, etc of various components of assets and
liabilities on the basis of past data / empirical studies could classify them in the appropriate time
buckets, subject to approval from the ALCO / Board. A copy of the note approved by the ALCO /
Board may be sent to the Department of Banking Supervision.
APPENDIX - I
Maturity Profile - Liquidity
Heads of Accounts Classification into time buckets
A. Outflows
1. Capital, Reserves and Surplus Over 5 years bucket.
2. Demand Deposits (Current and Savings Demand Deposits may be classified into volatile
Bank Deposits) and core portions. 25% of deposits are generally
withdrawable on demand. This portion may be
treated as volatile. While volatile portion can be
placed in the first time bucket i.e., 1-14 days, the
core portion may be placed in 1 - 2 years bucket.
3. Term Deposits Respective maturity buckets.
4. Certificates of Deposit, Borrowings and Respective maturity buckets.
Bonds (including Sub-Ordinated Debt)
5. Other Liabilities and Provisions
(i) Bills Payable (i) 1-14 days bucket.
(ii) Inter-office Adjustment (ii) As per trend analysis. Items not
representing cash payables, may be placed
in over 5 years bucket.
(iii)  Provisions for NPAs (iii)
a) Sub-standard a) 2-5 years bucket.
b) Doubtful and Loss b) Over 5 years bucket.
(iv) Provisions for depreciation in (iv) Over 5 years bucket.
investments
(v) Provisions for NPAs in investments (v)a) Sub-standard a) 2-5 years bucket.
b) Doubtful and Loss b) Over 5 years bucket.
(vi) Provisions for other purposes (vi) Respective buckets depending on the
purpose.
(vii) Other Liabilities (vii) Respective maturity buckets. Items not
representing cash payables (i.e. income
received in advances etc.) may be placed in
over 5 years bucket.
B. Inflows
1. Cash 1-14 days bucket
2. Balances with RBI While the excess balance over the required
CRR/SLR may be shown under 1-14 days
bucket, the Statutory Balances may be
distributed amongst various time buckets
corresponding to the maturity profile of DTL
with a time-lag of 14 days.
3. Balances with other Banks
(i) Current Account (i) Non-withdrawable portion on account of
stipulations of minimum balances may be
shown under 1-2 years bucket and the
remaining balances may be shown under
1-14 days bucket.
(ii) Money at Call and Short Notice, (ii) Respective maturity buckets.
Term Deposits and other
placements
4. Investments
(i) Approved securities (i) Respective maturity buckets excluding the
amount required to be reinvested to
maintain SLR corresponding to the DTL
profile in various time buckets.
(ii) Corporate debentures and bonds, (ii) Respective maturity buckets. Investments
PSU bonds, CDs and CPs, classified as NPAs should be shown under
Redeemable preference Shares, 2-5 years bucket (sub-standard) or over 5
Units of Mutual Funds years bucket (doubtful and loss).
(close ended), etc.(iii) Shares / Units of Mutual Funds (iii) Over 5 years bucket.
(open ended)
(iv) Investments in Subsidiaries/Joint (iv) Over 5 years bucket.
Ventures
5. Advances (Performing)
(i) Bills Purchased and Discounted (i) Respective maturity buckets.
(including bills under DUPN)
(ii) Cash Credit/Overdraft (including (ii) Banks should undertake a study of
TOD) and Demand Loan behavioural and seasonal pattern of
component of Working Capital. availments based on outstandings and the
core and volatile portion should be
identified. While the volatile portion could
be shown in the respective maturity buckets,
the core portion may be shown under 1-2
years bucket.
(iii) Term Loans (iii) Interim cash flows may be shown under
respective maturity buckets.
6. NPAs
(i) Sub-standard (i) 2-5 years bucket.
(ii) Doubtful and Loss (ii) Over 5 years bucket.
7. Fixed Assets Over 5 years bucket
8. Other Assets
(i) Inter-office Adjustment (i) As per trend analysis. Intangible items or
items not representing cash receivables may
be shown in over 5 years bucket.
(ii) Others (ii) Respective maturity buckets. Intangible
assets and assets not representing cash
receivables may be shown in over 5 years
bucket.
C. Contingent Liabilities / Lines of
Credit committed / available and other
Inflows / Outflows
1. (i) Lines of Credit committed to (i) 1-14 days bucket.
Institutions (outflow)(ii) Unavailed portion of Cash Credit / (ii) Banks should undertake a study of the
Overdraft / Demand loan component behavioural and seasonal pattern of potential
of Working Capital limits (outflow) availments from the accounts and the
amounts so arrived at may be shown under
relevant maturity buckets upto 12 months.
2. Letters of Credit / Guarantees (outflow) Historical trend analysis ought to be conducted
on the devolvements and the amounts so arrived
at in respect of outstanding Letters of Credit /
Guarantees (net of margins) should be
distributed amongst various time buckets.
3. Repos / Bills Rediscounted (DUPN) / Respective maturity buckets.
Swaps INR / USD, maturing forex
forward contracts etc. (outflow / inflow)
4. Interest payable / receivable Respective maturity buckets.
(outflow / inflow)
Note :
(i) Liability on account of any other contingency may be shown under respective
maturity buckets.
(ii) All overdue liabilities may be placed in the 1-14 days bucket.
(iii) Interest and instalments from advances and investments, which are overdue for less
than one month may be placed in the 3-6 months, bucket. Further, interest and
instalments due (before classification as NPAs) may be placed in the 6-12 months
bucket without the grace period of one month if the earlier receivables remain
uncollected.
D. Financing of Gap:
     In case the negative gap exceeds the prudential limit of 20% of outflows, the bank may
show by way of a foot note as to how it proposes to finance the gap to bring the mismatch
within the prescribed limits. The gap can be financed from market borrowings (call /
term), Bills Rediscounting, Refinance from RBI / others, Repos and deployment of foreign
currency resources after conversion into rupees ( unswapped foreign currency funds ) etc.APPENDIX - II
Interest Rate Sensitivity
Heads of Accounts Rate sensitivity and time bucket
Liabilities
1. Capital, Reserves and Surplus Non-sensitive.
2. Current Deposits Non-sensitive.
3. Savings Bank Deposits Sensitive to the extent of interest paying (core)
portion. This may be included in the 3-6 months
bucket. The non-interest paying portion may be
shown in non-sensitive bucket.
4. Term Deposits and Certificates of Sensitive and reprices on maturity. The amounts
Deposit should be distributed to different buckets on the
basis of remaining maturity. However, in case of
floating term deposits, the amounts may be
shown under the time bucket when deposits
contractually become due for repricing.
5. Borrowings - Fixed Sensitive and reprices on maturity. The amounts
should be distributed to different buckets on the
basis of remaining maturity.
6. Borrowings - Floating Sensitive and reprices when interest rate is reset.
The amounts should be distributed to the
appropriate bucket which refers to the repricing
date.
7. Borrowings - Zero Coupon Sensitive and reprices on maturity. The amounts
should be distributed to the respective maturity
buckets.
8. Borrowings from RBI Upto 1 month bucket.
9. Refinances from other agencies. (a) Fixed rate : As per respective maturity.(b) Floating rate : Reprices when interest rate is
reset.
10. Other Liabilities and Provisions
(i) Bills Payable (i) Non-sensitive.
(ii) Inter-office Adjustment (ii) Non-sensitive.
(iii)Provisions (iii) Non-sensitive.
(iv)Others (iv) Non-sensitive.
11. Repos/Bills Re-discounted (DUPN), Reprices only on maturity and should be
Swaps (Buy / Sell) etc. distributed to the respective maturity buckets.
Assets
1. Cash Non - sensitive.
2. Balances with RBI Interest earning portion may be shown in 3 - 6
months bucket. The balance amount is non-
sensitive.
3. Balances with other Banks
(i) Current Account (i) Non-sensitive.
(ii) Money at Call and Short Notice, (ii) Sensitive on maturity. The amounts should
Term Deposits and other placements. be distributed to the respective maturity
buckets.
4. Investments (Performing)
(i) Fixed Rate / Zero Coupon (i) Sensitive on maturity.
(ii) Floating Rate (ii) Sensitive at the next repricing date
5. Shares / Units of Mutual Funds Non-sensitive.
6. Advances (Performing)
(i) Bills Purchased and Discounted (i) Sensitive on maturity
(including bills under DUPN)
(ii) Cash Credits / Overdrafts (including (ii) Sensitive only when PLR/risk premium is
TODs) / Loans repayable on changed. Of late, frequent changes in PLR
demand and Term Loans have been noticed. Thus, each bank should
foresee the direction of interest rate
movements and capture the amounts in the
respective maturity buckets by which time
PLR would be revised.
7. NPAs (Advances and Investments) *(i) Sub-Standard (i) 2-5 years bucket.
(ii) Doubtful and Loss (ii) Over 5 years bucket.
8. Fixed Assets Non-sensitive.
9. Other Assets.
(i) Inter-office Adjustment (i) Non-sensitive.
(ii) Others (ii) Non-sensitive.
10. Reverse Repos, Swaps (Sell/Buy) and Sensitive on maturity.
Bills Rediscounted (DUPN)
11. Other products (Interest Rate)
(i) Swaps (i) Sensitive and should be distributed under
different buckets with reference to maturity.
(ii) Other Derivatives (ii) Should be suitably classified as and when
introduced.
* Amounts to be shown net of provisions.
ANNEXURE - I
NAME OF THE BANK
Statement of Structural Liquidity as on
(Amounts in Crores of Rupees)
RESIDUAL MATURITY
1-14 15-28 29 days 3-6 6-12 1-2 2-5 Over 5 Total
Days days to 3 months months years years years
OUTFLOWS months
1. Capital
2. Reserves & Surplus
3. Deposits XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Current Deposits
(ii) Savings Bank Deposits
(iii) Term Deposits
(iv) Certificates of Deposit
4. Borrowings XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Call and Short Notice
(ii) Inter-Bank (Term)
(iii) Refinances
(iv) Others (specify)
5. Other Liabilities & Provisions XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Bills Payable(ii) Inter-office Adjustment
(iii) Provisions
(iv) Others
6. Lines of Credit committed to XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i)   Institutions
(ii) Customers
7. Unavailed portion of Cash
Credit / Overdraft / Demand Loan
component of Working Capital
8. Letters of Credit / Guarantees
9. Repos
10. Bills Rediscounted (DUPN)
11. Swaps (Buy/Sell) / maturing
forwards
12. Interest payable
13. Others (specify)
A. TOTAL OUTFLOWS
INFLOWS
1. Cash
2. Balances with RBI
3. Balances with other Banks XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Current Account
(ii) Money at Call and Short
Notice, Term Deposits and other
placements
4. Investments (including those
under Repos but excluding Reverse
Repos)
5. Advances(Performing) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Bills Purchased and Discounted
(including bills under DUPN)
(ii) Cash Credits, Overdrafts and
Loans repayable on demand
(iii) Term Loans
6. NPAs (Advances and
Investments)
7. Fixed Assets
8. Other Assets XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(i) Inter-office Adjustment
(ii) Others
9. Reverse Repos
10. Swaps (Sell / Buy)/ maturing
forwards
11. Bills Rediscounted (DUPN)
12. Interest receivable
13. Committed Lines of Credit
14. Others (specify).
B. TOTAL INFLOWS
C. MISMATCH ( B-A )
D. CUMULATIVE
MISMATCH
E. C as % To AANNEXURE - III
Name of the Bank
Statement of Short-term Dynamic Liquidity as on
(Amounts  in Crores of Rupees)
A. Outflows
1 - 14 days 15-28 29-90
Days days
1 Net increase in loans and advances
2 Net increase in investments:
i) Approved securities
ii) Money market instruments (other than Treasury bills)
iii) Bonds/Debentures/shares
iv) Others
3 Inter-bank obligations
4 Off-balance sheet items (Repos, swaps, bills discounted, etc.)
5 Others
TOTAL OUTFLOWS
B. Inflows
1 Net cash position
2 Net increase in deposits (less CRR obligations)
3 Interest on investments
4 Inter-bank claims
5 Refinance eligibility (Export credit)
6 Off-balance sheet items (Reverse repos, swaps, bills discounted, etc.)
7 Others
TOTAL INFLOWS
C. Mismatch (B - A)
D. Cumulative mismatch
E. C as a % to total outflows