banks and financial institutions in tackling the problem of Year 2000.
are expected to be Y2K compliant by December 1998.
(Alpana Killawala)
Press Release 1998-99/789
General Manager
As per the reports available, over 70 per cent of the Commercial Banks and their subsidiaries
the Reserve Bank of India.
institutions would review the progress bimonthly. A bimonthly report is submitted by them to
turn report to top managements of banks. The boards of directors of each bank and financial
up in each bank. The Core Groups report to regional/zonal Offices and the zonal offices in
Banks and financial institutions are required to monitor the progress through a core group set
Department of Electronics are also invited to the Committee.
Bank, IBA, NIBM and few selected banks. Representatives of Ministry of Finance and
Bank, Chief General Mangers of regulatory and supervisory departments of the Reserve
problem. The other members of the committee are three Executive Directors of the Reserve
banks and financial institutions, non-banking financial companies in the areas of Y2K
(Shri S.P.Talwar) to monitor bimonthly the progress made by the Reserve Bank of India,
The Reserve Bank of India has constituted a high level committee under its Deputy Governor
replaced and will be Y2K compliant.
operated by the Reserve Bank of India which are at present not Y2K compliant, are being
machines. The major MICR cheque processing systems at the four metropolitan centres
to repair, replace or abandon machines depending on the test results by Y2K version of the
financial institutions so that they could test each and every computer. They were also advised
Grindlays, Citibank and State Bank of India. Test kits were made available to the banks and
(NIBM), Tata Consultancy Services, Tata Infotech, Standard Chartered Bank, ANZ
(IBA) and the Reserve Bank of India through National Institute for Bank Management
the Bank of England, the FED, Presentations were organised by Indian Banks' Association
subject received from a number to sources including the Bank for International Settlement,
This was followed by making available to banks and financial institutions material on the
the systems are Y2K compliant or not.
application software that they possess and do the scoping and diagnostics to assess whether
banks to prepare a detailed inventory of the hardware, operating system software and
institutions way back in September 1996 when a detailed circular was issued advising the
The Reserve Bank of India initiated a process of creation of awareness in banks and financial
and Financial Sector". The publication brings out clearly the broad approach adopted by
The Reserve Bank of India has printed a booklet on "Year 2000 Preparations in the Banking
RBI Booklet on Y2K