` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 22,1998 
METHODOLOGY 
• Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks  
Formulation of Approach  
2.01 In view of the task assigned and the short time at its disposal, the approach formulated was to obtain structured 
responses from commercial banks on some aspects of its terms of reference, and interaction with farmer-borrowers, 
bank and Government officials, agricultural scientists, extension workers and representatives of farmers associations in 
different parts of the country.  
2.02 The Committee sought the views of public sector banks and select private sector banks on the existing systems 
and procedures for processing and sanction of loan applications as well as their perception on factors impeding the flow 
of credit to the agricultural sector and suggestions for improving / streamlining the same (Annex - I). Responses were 
received from 22 banks (Annex û II). The constraints identified, and suggestions made, were subsequently discussed at 
various fora and many of them have been incorporated in the report .  
2.03 In order to obtain feedback directly from bank branches, government officials, extension workers, etc., the 
Committee visited select States in different regions of the country. In each of the States visited, the Committee followed 
a uniform approach consisting of meetings / interaction with:  
• Farmer - borrowers both individually and in groups including associations of farmers.  
• Bank staff at the branch level.  
• Concerned bank officials at the Zonal & Regional level.  
• Other institutions (including NGOs) connected with rural credit / representing farmers' interests .  
• Faculty and staff of Agricultural Colleges/Universities, representatives of Extension Agencies and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras.  
• CMDs and senior officials in charge of rural banking / priority sector/ agricultural banking divisions of banks having 
their corporate offices in the States visited.  
• Government representatives at the State and district levels.  
2.04 The selection of States was on a representative basis comprising three States from the Northern Region (Punjab, 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh), two each from the Eastern and Southern Regions (Orissa & West Bengal and Andhra 
Pradesh & Karnataka), and one each from the Western and Central Regions (Maharashtra & Madhya Pradesh).  
2.05 The Committee also received representations / petitions / submissions directly from interested individuals and 
institutions. At certain places, individuals came forward voluntarily to tender information and advice. The inputs so 
received have also been taken into account while formulating the committee's recommendations.  
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks 