` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 22,1998 
An overview of delepments in rural credit 
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks  
4.01 Although rural credit has been an area of policy interventions for nearly five decades, the objectives of policy have 
remained constant: to institutionalise credit, to enlarge its coverage, to ensure provision of timely and adequate finance 
to as large a segment of the rural population as possible so as to achieve anticipated growth rates in agricultural 
production and employment.  
4.02 The Indian rural credit system as it has emerged is a product of both evolution and intervention. Till the late sixties, 
policy interventions in the area of rural credit were mostly confined to the co-operatives which were considered as most 
suitable for this work . The All India Rural Credit Review Committee pointed out that, despite the support extended, co-
operatives had begun to exhibit several weaknesses in the form of overdues and organisational ineffectiveness, and 
were not geared for meeting the growing needs of the agricultural sector on account of application of modern 
technology and innovations relating to production, processing and marketing. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
a significantly enlarged role for commercial banks both by way of current production and long-term development.  
4.03 With the nationalisation of major commercial banks in 1969, branch banking in the rural areas acquired a new 
momentum , and the outreach of the commercial banking system was considerably enlarged within a relatively short 
period.  
4.04 It is now well accepted that the strategies followed resulted in certain real gains: there was a broadening of the 
rural infrastructure for credit delivery, increase in outreach, reduction in the influence of informal agencies as evidenced 
by increase in the relative share of institutional sources in the cash debts of rural households and substantially stepped-
up credit flows for agriculture & allied activities.  
4.05 On the debit side, quality suffered, overdues increased , repayment ethics were diluted, the recycling of resources 
decelerated and the profitability and viability of the institutional structure was seriously eroded . On the eve of the 1991 
economic reforms, the rural credit delivery system was in poor shape.  
4.06 From 1991 onwards an overall scheme of structural reforms was initiated. Financial Sector Reforms were a part of 
this process and included, among others, the initiation of a number of measures in the field of rural credit such as:  
• Deregulation of interest rates of co-operatives.  
• Deregulation of lending rates of RRBs.  
• Deregulation of lending rates of commercial banks for all loans above Rs.2 lac.  
• Financial and managerial restructuring, including recapitalisation, of select Regional Rural Banks (RRBs).  
• Application of the DAP / MOU discipline for co-operative banks & RRBs.  
• Introduction of prudential accounting norms and provisioning requirements for all rural credit agencies.  
• Relaxations in the Service Area Approach.  
• Setting up of specialised branches for catering to the hi-tech requirements of the farm sector.  
• Widening the scope of indirect lending to the priority sector through placement of deposits with / investments in the 
debt instruments of institutions engaged in building rural infrastructure.  • Introduction of a system of special focus for lending to agriculture by commercial banks through Special Agricultural 
Credit Plans (SACP).  
• Increasing RBI's refinance support and capital contribution to NABARD.  
• Constituting the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) in NABARD for upgradation of the credit absorptive 
capacity of the rural sector through focussed attention on completion of on-going rural infrastructure projects.  
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks 