` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
March 17, 1998 
 
RBI Seminar on New Regulatory Framework for NBFCs 
The Reserve Bank of India today organised a one-day Seminar on the New Regulatory 
Framework for the Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs). The Seminar was held 
at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai.  
The Seminar was attended by a cross section of NBFCs, their Associations, chambers 
of commerce and representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and 
credit rating agencies. The purpose behind organising such a Seminar was to effectively 
disseminate the rationale of the revised regulatory framework for NBFCs for its better 
appreciation, the need for effective supervision of the NBFC sector and to share major 
supervisory concerns.  
Shri S.P. Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India delivered the Key Note 
Address. In his address the Deputy Governor underscored the importance played by the 
NBFCs and stated that the NBFCs more particularly the leasing and hire purchase 
finance companies, perform a very important financial intermediation role contributing to 
the economic development of the country. They supplement the role of banking sector to 
cater to the increasing financial need of a developing economy and have diversified their 
activities and expanded intermediation both in the areas of credit and in channelising the 
savings of the society. They act as agents between the savers and users of funds and 
offer tailor made services to both the borrowers as also the savers.  
The Deputy Governor then briefly outlined the history of Reserve Bank regulations over 
the NBFC sector. He stated that the RBI Act was amended in January 1997 by effecting 
comprehensive changes in Chapter III-B and V of the Act vesting more powers with the 
RBI. The entire gamut of regulation and supervision over the activities of NBFCs has 
undergone a qualitative change both in terms of thrust and forces in the context of the 
amendment to RBI Act and in the light of certain disquieting developments in the NBFC 
sector in the recent past.  
Explaining the focus of the New NBFC Policy, the Deputy Governor stated that the 
regulatory attention would now be on NBFCs accepting public deposit. The RBI has 
favoured a policy to restrict the short term and the unsecured borrowings of the NBFCs 
on the strength of their credit rating, the size of NOF and the activities of the companies. 
This, he said was important as the saving community is the fountainhead of public 
deposits and it was necessary to persistently maintain their confidence.  The Deputy Governor assured that the Reserve Bank of India had an open mind and 
was willing to sympathetically consider the genuine difficulties of the NBFCs in 
compliance with the new regulatory framework. He stated that the new regulations have 
already been relaxed once in response to the request made by NBFCs.  
The Deputy Governor elaborated on the steps taken by the Reserve Bank to put in place 
an effective supervisory mechanism over NBFCs. He said that the Reserve Bank has 
brought out a comprehensive Inspection Manual and has devised Special formats for 
Off-site Reporting/Monitoring. Companies with asset size of Rs.100 crore and above 
have been asked to furnish an Annual Return giving the comparative position of their 
operational data for 3 years in regard to various items of their balance sheet, profit and 
loss account and certain key ratios. It is the intention that the On-site Inspection should 
be more by exception, than a routine activity. Accordingly, On-site Inspection of NBFCs 
will be carried out on a random basis taking into account the record of their compliance 
with the Directions and prudential norms, incidence of complaints, problem companies 
and will cover the NBFCs having large amounts of public deposits. The remaining 
companies will be mainly subjected to Off-site Surveillance and scrutiny of Statutory 
Returns, Balance Sheets, Profit & Loss Account, Auditor's Reports, etc. The Reserve 
Bank proposes to network Central Office with all the Regional Offices to build up profile 
of the companies and reduce response time in follow up of the irregularities with the 
erring NBFCs. All the returns are to be computer compatible and their processing has to 
be computerised so as to facilitate their scrutiny without any delay. These returns are to 
serve the objective of off-site surveillance. The Reserve Bank has opened 16 Regional 
Offices of the Department to serve the NBFC sector at a place nearer to the place of 
their registered offices.  
Stressing on the need for depositors' education, the Deputy Governor stated that the 
Reserve Bank has a plan for educating general public through media. The purpose of 
this campaign is to explain to the masses at large that they may look into certain aspects 
of functioning of the concerned NBFC and certain other features in its deposit schemes 
while making deposits with it. He, however, pointed out that this is the task which the 
NBFCs themselves or the Self Regulatory Organisation should undertake.  
The Deputy Governor also mentioned that the Reserve Bank of India has taken up the 
matter of offering insurance to depositors of the NBFCs with General Insurance 
Corporation of India with a request to consider formulating a scheme for deposit 
insurance for NBFCs. The Deputy Governor also stressed the need for ensuring the 
quality of assets created by the NBFCs which has a direct bearing on the financial 
viability and depositors' confidence.  
The Deputy Governor stated that the Reserve Bank had received 37,478 applications 
from existing companies. Of these, 9074 companies were found to have NOF of Rs. 25 
lakh and above. Of these again, 2371 companies were accepting public deposits. The 
Reserve Bank has already approved 2540 NBFCs for registration and the application of 
15 NBFCs have been rejected. It is intended to complete the process of registration by 
end June 1998. The Deputy Governor advised that it is now enjoined upon the statutory 
auditors of NBFCs to directly report to the RBI the cases where applications for 
certificate of registration have not been made to the Reserve Bank. He cautioned that 
any failure to do so on the part of both the NBFCs and their auditors will attract severe 
penalties as provided for under the RBI Act.  
In conclusion the Deputy Governor reiterated the objective of the regulation and 
supervision as also the mission of RBI is to ensure that -  i. the financial companies function on healthy lines;  
ii. these companies function as a part of the financial system within the policy 
framework, in such a manner that their existence and functioning do not lead to 
systemic aberrations;  
iii. the quality of surveillance and supervision exercised by the Bank over the 
NBFCs is sustained by keeping pace with the developments that take place in 
this sector of the financial system; and that  
iv. the depositors' interest is safeguarded.  
He hoped that that 3 to 5 years down the line, an efficient, viable and vibrant NBFC 
sector would emerge.  
In their presentations, the associations of the NBFCs and chambers of commerce 
welcomed the regulations but suggested substitution of mandatory requirement of 
investment grade credit rating by the supervisory rating as per the recommendations of 
Khanna Committee for acceptance of deposits from public more particularly for small 
companies engaged in hire purchase finance and equipment leasing activities. They 
requested for certain relaxations in regard to provisioning norms on NPAs against lease 
and hire purchase assets and valuation of unquoted investments or staggering these 
provisioning norms so as to allow them some time to adjust to the new norms. They 
urged for a level playing field for NBFCs in the matters of tax reliefs as are available to 
banks and financial institutions. They also sought a few clarifications on certain 
provisions of the RBI Directions. The Associations suggested for a developmental role 
for the RBI to visualise some measures to improve their liquidity position in times of 
crises so as to avoid any adverse impact on the credibility with the depositors. The 
NBFCs supported the idea of insurance for NBFC deposits.  
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
 
Press Release : 1997-98/847 
 
 