` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 22,1998 
Review of literature 
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks  
3.01 Before addressing itself to the work assigned, the Committee undertook a quick survey of the recommendations 
made by earlier Committees on the subject. It noted that the question of simplification of application forms, lending 
procedures and information systems has come up repeatedly for consideration.  
3.02 In response to the recommendations of the Regional Consultative Committee (RCC) Central Region, the Reserve 
Bank of India had in 1972 constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri K K Ray for simplification of 
application forms and lending procedures. The simplified forms recommended by the Ray Committee were adopted by 
commercial banks.  
3.03 Later with the setting up of RRBs, a Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr C.D. Datey for 
devising simplified application forms suitable to the needs of the RRB borrowers.  
3.04 In June 1978, the Government of India appointed a working group under the chairmanship of Shri Baldev Singh for 
suggesting further simplification of application forms and lending procedures and introducing, at least within each State, 
uniform application forms and procedures as between different commercial banks. During its interaction with banks, it 
was reported to the Committee that the forms for agricultural loans presently in use are based, in the main, on the 
recommendations of this working group.  
3.05 The Committee further notes that ancillary matters have also been examined by earlier working groups / 
committees. Thus, the working group set up under Shri P. N. Khanna had looked into the operational and accounting 
procedures prevalent in RRBs while the Committee headed by Shri I.C.Puri had made recommendations regarding tiny 
and village industries.  
3.06 The review of earlier literature has strengthened the committee's conviction that any enquiry into the constraints in 
the flow of credit to the farm sector must be approached in a holistic manner and that refinement in forms, systems, 
procedures and reporting formats can not by themselves lead to increased flows, unless certain other preconditions are 
complied with by all the agencies concerned. This Committee has, therefore, focussed on the spirit of its mandate, and 
approached its task in a broader perspective, dovetailing recommendations on policy interventions with changes in 
systems and procedures.  
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks 