` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
29-04-1998 
 
Monetary and Credit Policy For the First Half of 1998-99 
 
• Monetary Policy to support growth in 1998-99.  
• Sufficient credit to be available for industrial revival.  
• Bank Rate reduced by 1 percentage point.  
• Concessions for exporters.  
• A number of reform measures introduced to give greater  
• freedom to banks and further reforms of financial system.  
• Credit Policy to be more flexible. Annual monetary policy  
• announcements to lay stress on structural measures.  
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, today unveiled his `Monetary and Credit Policy for the First 
Half of 1998-99'. The statement contained many structural measures, in response to the important changes 
taking place in the regulatory framework for financial markets and a few short-term credit policy measures.  
Macro-economic Developments in 1997-98  
While reviewing the economic developments in 1997-98, the Governor stated that broad money (M3) growth 
at 17.0 per cent was significantly higher than the expansion of 16.0 per cent in the previous year. He 
explained that the increase was on account of a substantial expansion of domestic credit to both, government 
and commercial sectors, and an increase in the net foreign exchange assets of the banking system. Gross 
market borrowings of the Central Government were also high, he added. Aggregate deposits of scheduled 
commercial banks increased by 18.9 per cent as compared with an increase of 16.5 per cent in 1996-97. The 
conventional non-food credit of scheduled commercial banks expanded by 14.2 per cent in 1997-98 as 
against 10.9 per cent in the previous year. Including the investments in bonds/debentures/shares of the 
corporates and commercial paper, etc., the increase in non-food credit was 17.6 per cent as compared with 
that of 12.2 per cent in 1996-97.  
GDP  
Pointing out to the advance estimates of the Central Statistical Organisation, according to which, the real 
GDP growth was estimated to have slowed down to 5.0 per cent in 1997-98, the Governor stated that the 
deceleration in industrial growth was marked. This was a matter of concern for the growth of incomes in the 
economy as well as for the development of the financial sector. It had repercussions also on the financial 
position of industrial enterprises, which in turn adversely affects both the demand for and recovery of credit 
from the banking sector.  Inflation  
The Governor noted that the annual rate of inflation in 1997-98 on a point-to-point basis was lower at 5.0 per 
cent than that of 6.9 per cent recorded in the preceding year. This, the Governor said, was welcome as it 
provided some needed room for manoeuvre in respect of monetary and fiscal policy in 1998-99. He, however, 
emphasized that the maintenance of the rate of inflation at the level witnessed in 1997-98 would depend 
critically on sustained growth of output in the economy and a careful and productive use of financial 
resources, both in the public and private sectors, for capital investment rather than for higher current 
consumption or fiscal subsidies. This was particularly true as the growth of liquidity in 1997-98 was higher 
than envisaged and the growth of industrial output was lower. The Governor urged that in this situation, 
concerted efforts were required on the part of all economic agents to accelerate investment and output in the 
economy.  
Exchange Rate  
Referring to the developments in some of the Asian currencies, the Governor stated that they exerted 
significant pressures on the exchange rate of the rupee in the second half of 1997-98. A package of strong 
monetary measures was, therefore, introduced on January 16, 1998. The Governor pointed out that the 
impact of these measures on the external position of the country was favourable. During 1997-98, the foreign 
currency assets of the Reserve Bank increased by US $ 3.6 billion. Since January 16, 1998, the foreign 
currency assets increased by US $ 2.5 billion up to March 31, 1998. Net of outstanding forward sales and 
purchases, the increase in foreign currency assets at end-March 1998 was US $ 2.2 billion over the financial 
year. On the same basis, the increase was US $ 3.1 billion between January 16, 1998 and end-March 1998.  
An important lesson of the developments in the exchange markets, the Governor stated, is that all countries, 
and developing countries in particular, have to be constantly watchful of the developments that may adversely 
affect exchange markets. There can be no room for complacency in this regard. He added that for monetary 
and other measures to be effective, it is also necessary to take hard decisions early rather than allow matters 
to get out of hand and then try to control them. While closer links among different segments of financial 
markets were desirable for improving allocative efficiency, they also posed new challenges for monetary 
management.  
Stance for Monetary Policy for 1998-99  
Dwelling on the stance of monetary policy in 1998-99, the Governor said that it has to reflect developments 
that have taken place during the previous year, and the broad economic objectives for the current year. 
According to him among the developments that have to be taken into account were: higher than the projected 
growth of money supply in relation to growth in GDP in 1997-98; substantial increase in financial flows from 
banks to the corporate sector despite a slowdown in industrial growth; higher market borrowing requirements 
of the Government; and continued uncertainty in external currency and product markets.  
Among the important short term economic objectives were: the need to accelerate industrial investment and 
output in the economy; maintenance of low rates of inflation; continued pursuit of financial reform; reduction in 
interest rates; and improvement in credit delivery mechanisms, particularly for agriculture and medium and 
small sectors. The Governor considered the task of achieving a balance among different objectives as not 
easy and stated that it would require constant vigilance on the monetary front.  
The Governor observed that given the rising shares of the industrial and services sectors in GDP and the 
more recent experience, it had become increasingly evident that the Indian economy has the potential of 
attaining a growth rate of 7 - 8 per cent per year over the medium-term. For the immediate future, i.e., 1998-
99, however, the Governor emphasised that a growth rate of 6.5 to 7.0 per cent was needed to be achieved in 
order to realise this potential. He noted that at the beginning of the current financial year, liquidity is 
comfortable. This is evidenced in the large outstandings of repos with the Reserve Bank which are readily 
available to the banking system. At the close of business on April 27, 1998, such repos amounted to Rs.8,529 
crore.  The Reserve Bank will ensure that sufficient credit is available to permit realisation of the growth potential. At 
the same time, it is desirable that the inflation rate remains at current levels. On this basis, a reasonable 
target for M3 growth in 1998-99 was fixed in the range of 15.0 to 15.5 per cent. The Governor stated that this 
order of growth in money supply should be sufficient to ensure that availability of credit is not a constraint on 
growth of output in the economy. The Governor advised the banks to plan their credit operations on this 
assumption and assured that, barring unexpected developments on the price front or in the foreign exchange 
markets, sufficient liquidity would be available in the current year to finance additional productions.  
The Governor regarded the financial reforms introduced since 1992 as being highly significant. The 
deregulation and liberalisation of the system have paved the way for the emergence of open market 
operations and interest rate as important instruments in the conduct of monetary policy, he stated and noted 
that institutional measures have also been undertaken to promote greater integration of financial markets. The 
Governor assured that efforts in this direction will continue.  
Monetary and Credit Policy Measures  
Stating that in view of several important changes that have taken place in the regulatory framework for 
financial markets, greater importance to structural measures would henceforth be given in the credit and 
monetary policy statement at the beginning of the financial year. The Governor emphasised that as a matter 
of policy, such structural measures will not normally be changed in the course of the year and will also be 
expected to continue over the medium-term. Short-term measures, such as changes in the Bank Rate, Cash 
Reserve Ratio (CRR), repo rates, access to refinance, etc., may also be included if proposed changes in 
these variables happen to coincide with the timing of the April statement, he added. The Governor hoped that 
it would be understood that these short-term credit and regulatory measures are subject to change at short 
notice in the light of actual developments and the emerging external market conditions. The credit policy 
statement for the second half of the year will generally be confined to a review of monetary developments in 
the first half of the year and to such changes as may be necessary in monetary projections during the second 
half of the year.  
(a) Structural Measures  
Alluding to the two monetary policy statements last year, in April and October 1997, which contained a 
number of measures to widen and deepen the financial markets, the Governor stated that the process is 
needed to be continued in order to further this process and to provide greater flexibility to banks in regard to 
certain aspects pertaining to deposits and lending rates. He stated that it is proposed to continue the process 
of further enhancing the efficiency of the money markets and the government securities markets and to 
introduce further refinements in repo and reverse repo transactions being undertaken by the Reserve Bank to 
regulate liquidity conditions in the market.  
Money Market  
The Governor announced that with effect from May 9, 1998, the following measures will be put into effect:  
• The minimum size of operation per transaction by entities routing their lendings through primary 
dealers (PDs) in the call money market will be reduced from Rs.5 crore to Rs.3 crore.  
• The minimum lock-in period for Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and units of Money Market Mutual 
Funds(MMMFs) will be reduced from 30 days to 15 days.  Government Securities Market  
The Governor said that the following measures have been taken to further deepen the market:  
• The practice of reverse repos with Primary Dealers in specified securities has been dispensed with 
and instead, liquidity support against the security of holdings in Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) 
accounts will be provided.  
• 182-Day Treasury Bill auctions on a fortnightly basis have been reintroduced.  
• The periodicity of holding 364-Day Treasury Bill auctions will be on a monthly basis as against the 
present arrangement of fortnightly auctions. * Foreign institutional investors (FIIs) will be permitted to 
the purchase/sell Treasury Bills within the overall approved debt ceilings. FIIs are currently allowed to 
operate in all dated Government Securities in the primary and secondary markets, including those 
with remaining maturities of less than one year. Their entry into the Treasury Bills market was 
deferred pending rationalisation of auction procedures. In the light of monetary policy of October 
1997, the RBI has recently commenced preannouncement of notified amounts in respect of Treasury 
Bill auctions and exclusion of non-competitive bids from the notified amounts. In view of this 
development, FIIs have been permitted to purchase/sell treasury bills. Treasury Bills normally carry a 
low rate of interest, but they provide an opportunity for temporary absorption of liquid funds pending 
investment in longer-term securities.  
Pointing out that in the recent months, repos were used to absorb or provide liquidity in the market 
and to signal changes in interest rates, the Governor proposed to use both, fixed interest and auction 
based repos, as appropriate. The Governor also stated that in addition to the current three-day and 
four-day repos, the Reserve Bank will, in due course, use one-day repos (including reverse repos) to 
absorb (or infuse) liquidity into the system.  
Deposit and Lending Rates  
In order to provide greater freedom to banks in respect of several aspects of their deposit/lending operations, 
the Governor proposed the following measures:  
• The minimum period of maturity of term deposits will be reduced from 30 to 15 days.  
• Banks will be permitted to determine their own penal interest rates for premature withdrawal of 
domestic term deposits. This will apply in respect of fresh and renewal of deposits. Banks will ensure 
that the depositors are made aware of the applicable penal rate along with the deposit rate.  
• Banks will be permitted to determine their own penal interest rates for premature withdrawal of NRE 
deposits as in the case of FCNR(B) deposits. This relaxation will apply in respect of fresh and 
renewal of deposits and depositors would need to be informed of the applicable penal rate.  
• Although interest rates on domestic term deposits were deregulated in 1997, a restriction was 
imposed on banks that they must offer the same rate on deposits of the same maturity irrespective of 
the size of such deposits. In response to representations received from banks, this restriction is being 
removed and bank boards will henceforth lay down the policy in this regard.  
• In order to remove the disincentive to the flow of credit to small borrowings below Rs.2 lakh, instead 
of prescribing a specific rate uniformly for all banks, it is being stipulated that the interest rates on 
loans below Rs.2 lakh should not exceed the Prime Lending Rate (PLR), which is available to the 
best borrowers, of the concerned bank.  
• All advances against term deposits should be at an interest rate equal to PLR or less.  
The Governor stated that the recent international developments have reiterated the problems related 
to short-term external liabilities and large unhedged positions of corporates in some of the East Asian 
countries. Even though such liabilities are very low in India at present, the Governor said that the 
Reserve Bank would seek to further encourage the banks to mobilise long-term deposits, while 
simultaneously discouraging them to mobilise short-term deposits. The Governor has accordingly 
decided that:  
• The interest rate ceiling on Foreign Currency Non-Resident Accounts (Banks)(FCNR(B)) deposits of 
one year and above will be increased by 50 basis points and that on such deposits below one year 
will be reduced by 25 basis points. * Banks will be permitted to fix their own overdue interest rates in respect of Foreign Currency Non-Resident Accounts (Banks)(FCNR(B)) and Non-Resident (External) 
Rupee Accounts (NRE) deposits, subject to these deposits being renewed.  
• As part of risk management, banks will be advised to monitor unhedged exposures of their clients by 
building in adequate risk evaluation procedures in their credit appraisal system.  
Valuation of Banks' Investments in Approved Securities  
The Governor recalled that in April 1992, the Reserve Bank had advised the banks to bifurcate their 
investments in approved securities into `permanent' and `current' categories. Over time, the ratio of current 
category in total investments has increased with a view to adopting prudent accounting standards and to 
move towards "mark to market" valuation of the investment portfolio. In order to continue with the trend, the 
Governor said that banks are required to classify a minimum of 70 per cent of their securities as `current' 
investments for the year ending March 31, 1999.  
Advances Against Shares to Individuals  
The Governor recalled that banks are allowed to grant advances against shares and debentures to individuals 
for meeting contingencies and needs of personal nature or for subscribing to rights or new issues of 
shares/debentures subject to a ceiling of Rs.10 lakh per borrower. Banks were also required to maintain a 
minimum margin of 50 per cent for advances against shares. The Governor announced that after reviewing 
the existing regulations, it has been decided to increase the ceiling to Rs.20 lakh if the advances were 
secured by dematerialised securities. The minimum prescribed margin against dematerialised shares would 
also stand reduced to 25 per cent.  
Credit Delivery  
The Governor mentioned that accelerating the flow of credit to agricultural sector and small scale industries, 
in particular, was important. The Governor indicated that in order to examine the problems faced by borrowers 
in these sectors, the Reserve Bank had, in December 1997 set up two one-man committees (consisting of 
Shri R.V.Gupta and Shri S.L.Kapur for agricultural and small scale industries, respectively). The Committee 
on Agricultural Credit has recently submitted its report and the Committee on Small Scale Industries is 
expected to submit its report in the next few days. It is proposed to make several procedural modifications in 
respect of agricultural credit in the light of the committee's recommendations.  
Prudential Norms and Supervision of Banks  
The Governor also indicated that the existing capital adequacy, income recognition and provisioning norms 
would be strengthened and in this context, specific decisions would be taken in the light of the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee on Banking Sector Reforms under the Chairmanship of Shri 
M.Narasimham. He proposed to move as early as possible towards full disclosure and transparency by banks 
and financial institutions in line with international best practices.  
Role of Banks and Development Finance Institutions (DFIs)  
The Governor said that the issues involved in moving towards the concept of "universal banking" and in 
harmonising the operations of term-lending institutions with banks were studied by a Working Group under 
the Chairmanship of Shri S.H.Khan, Chairman and Managing Director, Industrial Development Bank of India. 
These issues were important in a developing country like India where debt and securities markets were not 
fully developed and where financing of development projects, particularly infrastructure projects, presented 
special problems. Keeping these considerations in view, it is proposed to prepare a "Discussion Paper" on the 
subject, taking into account the recommendations of the Working Group and of the Narasimham Committee.  Credit Policy Measures  
In order to achieve the above structural measures which were of a long term nature, the following credit policy 
measures were announced.  
a) Bank Rate  
• Bank Rate has been reduced by one percentage point from 10 per cent to 9 per cent with immediate 
effect.  
b) Refinance Limits for Exports  
• With effect from the fortnight beginning May 9, 1998 export credit refinance will be restored to 100 per 
cent (instead of present 50 per cent) of the increase in outstanding export credit eligible for refinance 
over the level of such credit as on February 16, 1996,  
c) Rate of Interest on Exports  
• Interest rates on pre-shipment export credit up to 180 days has been reduced from existing 12.0 per 
cent to 11.0 per cent with immediate effect.  
• Interest rate against incentives receivable from government covered by ECGC guarantee in respect 
of pre-shipment credit up to 90 days has been reduced from the existing 12.0 per cent to 11.0 per 
cent with immediate effect.  
The Governor said that in view of the prevailing easy liquidity conditions as reflected in the large outstandings 
of repos equivalent of Rs.8,529 crore as on April 27, 1998, he was not announcing a further cut in cash 
reserve ratio (CRR) at this point of time. He, however, assured the bankers that a change in CRR would be 
announced in case market conditions so warrant. All other credit measures will continue as before.  
 (Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/1021  
 