` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Feb 18, 1998 
 
Reserve Bank further liberalises current account transactions 
With a view to further facilitating current account transactions, the Reserve Bank of India 
has amended/modified the exchange control regulations. In a detailed circular issued 
recently, the Reserve Bank has advised the following modifications in the exchange 
control regulations governing remittances by exporters and importers:  
Advance payments against exports 
Exporters can now receive interest bearing advance payments from their overseas 
buyers subject to the conditions that (i) the rate of interest on such advance does not 
exceed Libor + 100 basis points, (ii) the shipments to be made against the advance 
payments so received are monitored by the bank in India through which the advance 
payment has been received and (iii) the shipments are made within one year from the 
date of receipt of advance payment. In cases where exporters are unable to make 
shipments against advance payments received by them for exports, authorised dealers 
can allow remittances towards refund of advance payments (partly or fully). Authorised 
dealers can allow such remittances provided the unutilised portion of the advance is 
refunded within a period of one year of its receipt and the exporter produces (i) a 
chartered accountant's certificate that the amount is still outstanding in the books of the 
exporter and has not been adjusted in any manner, and (ii) a declaration that the 
advance was not against exports to be made in pursuance of any undertaking given to 
the Import Trade Control authorities in regard to fulfilment of export obligation. If, 
however, the advance was received for exports to be made in fulfilment of export 
obligation, the exporter should be advised to submit a no objection certificate from the 
Import Trade Control authorities for refund of the amount. Authorised dealers should 
also call for and cancel or suitably endorse the inward remittance certificate issued at the 
time of receipt of foreign exchange.  
Refund of Export Proceeds 
Similarly, authorised dealers through whom export proceeds were received may allow 
refund of export proceeds of goods exported from India if such goods are reimported into 
India on account of poor quality, etc. Authorised dealers can allow such refunds on the 
exporter producing satisfactory documentary evidence regarding (i) reimport of goods 
into India, viz., exchange control copy of the bill of entry, postal/courier wrappers and (ii) 
reasons for re-export of the goods by the foreign buyer. Authorised dealers should also 
advise the exporter to surrender the proportionate incentives if he has availed any.  Merchanting Trade 
Authorised dealers will now also allow advance remittances by their Indian customer-
merchant exporters to their overseas suppliers of goods in respect of merchanting trade 
transactions. Such remittances will be allowed against confirmed orders if the authorised 
dealer is satisfied about the capabilities of the merchant trader to perform the obligations 
of the order and that the transaction would result in adequate profit to the merchant 
trader. The authorised dealers will have to obtain a guarantee from an international bank 
of repute outside India from the foreign seller of goods if the amount of advance 
remittance exceeds US $ 15,000.  
Advance remittances for other transactions 
For service related transactions  
 
Authorised dealer will now allow advance payments in respect of other transactions such 
as engagement of foreign nationals, consultancy services, advertisement space in 
overseas newspapers/periodicals, specialised training to be provided abroad/in India, 
etc. In case such payments exceed US$15,000 or its equivalent, the overseas 
beneficiary of the remittance will have to furnish a guarantee from an overseas bank of 
international repute. The authorised dealers through whom the advance remittance is 
made, will have to follow up and ensure that the beneficiary of the advance remittance 
fulfils his obligations under the contract/agreement with the remitter in India.  
 
For feasibility studies  
 
Authorised dealers can allow remittances up to US$1,00,000 by Indian companies to 
overseas consultancy organisations for conducting feasibility studies for project to be set 
up abroad by the proposed joint venture/wholly owned subsidiary of the applicant Indian 
company. Such remittances will be allowed on production of (a) invoice from the 
overseas consultancy organisation indicating the charges for feasibility study, (b) a 
declaration from the remitter to the effect that the assignment has been completed and 
(c) undertaking/certificate regarding payment of income-tax.  
 
Other miscellaneous remittances  
 
In addition to these, the authorised dealers can allow certain other remittances without 
the approval of the Reserve Bank, These are:  
i. remittances by Indian courts in connection with execution of commission/letters 
of request against the documentary evidence of the court order indicating the 
amount of remittance;  
ii. remittance of alimony against the documentary evidence of the court order 
indicating the amount of alimony,  
iii. remittance of lease/rental charges for hiring web-space from foreign web servers 
and E-mail service providers against the documentary evidence of invoice from 
the overseas beneficiary and undertaking/accountant's certificate regarding 
income-tax;  
iv. remittance of sale proceeds of imported cars sold by foreign diplomats/missions 
to State Trading Corporation of India (STCI) against the documentary evidence 
of letter from STC in support of the sale price of the car;  v. remittance of sale proceeds of imported cars sold by diplomats/missions in India 
to another diplomat against documentary evidence in support of the sale price of 
the car and the fact that the payment by the purchaser was made out of funds 
brought from abroad in free foreign exchange or out of remittable funds;  
vi. remittance of net (of income tax) amount of bonus by Indian firms/companies to 
their employees who are Indian nationals posted abroad on production of 
documentary evidence in support of the remittable amount;  
vii. remittance of provident/pension/superannuation contributions in respect of 
foreign employees of Indian firms/companies who are permanently resident in 
India in accordance with the service conditions of the foreign national concerned;  
viii. remittance for payment of commission/remuneration by Indian firms/companies 
to their non-resident directors on production of a certified copy of audited balance 
sheet of the company together with a work sheet duly certified by a chartered 
accountant indicating how the remittable amount has been arrived at;  
ix. remittance of claims to overseas buyer in respect of marine insurance policies 
covering exports from India which have been settled by the General Insurance 
Corporation and its subsidiaries in favour of Indian exporters on production of 
documentary evidence in support of the claim provided the export proceeds in full 
have been received by the exporter.  
For medical treatment abroad  
 
The Reserve Bank of India has allowed authorised dealers to grant additional foreign 
exchange facilities to persons who have fallen ill after proceeding abroad for business, 
etc., visits. Authorised dealers can grant such additional exchange facilities on the basis 
of a certificate from the attending doctor/hospital abroad subject to submission of 
bills/vouchers in support of expenditure incurred on medical treatment on return of the 
persons concerned to India.  
 
The Reserve Bank has also raised indicative limit upto which authorised dealers can 
release exchange to residents for medical check up abroad from U.S.$ 500 to U.S.$ 
1000.  
 
Authorised dealers are now also allowed to release exchange @ U.S.$ 150 per day upto 
seven days to persons going abroad for medical check up. In such cases exchange @ 
U.S.$150 per day upto seven days may also be released to the attendant if it is 
necessary for the attendant to accompany the person going abroad for medical check up 
and a certificate from the attending doctor to this effect is produced.  
 
For tour operators/travel agents  
 
The Reserve bank has also removed quantitative restrictions on remittances of claims by 
Indian tour operators/travel agents to foreing tourists. Authorised dealers can now allow 
such remittances up to 10 per cent of the tour cost without any monetary ceiling subject 
to fulfilment of other conditions such as, verification of advance payment received and 
the details of the claims preferred by foreign tourists. Earlier, authorised dealers were 
permitted to allow such remittance by Indian tour operators/travel agents upto 10 per 
cent of the tour cost or US $ 200 per claim (whichever was less) in the case of individual 
foreign tourist and upto 10 per cent of the tour cost or US $ 1000 per claim (whichever 
was less) in the case of group tour.  
 
For use of news material   
Prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India is also no longer required for remitting the 
cost of material, such as, news features, photographs, cartoons, etc., used by Indian 
newspapers/periodicals/news agencies to overseas news/features agencies. Authorised 
dealers will allow such remittances directly in accordance with the approvals issued by 
the Government of India (Ministry of Information & Broadcasting).  
 
Reimbursements of expenses  
 
Under the present regulations firms, companies and other organisations engaging the 
services of foreign citizens have normally to pay for the passage fare of the non resident 
for visit to India in Indian rupees. Further the local expenses for internal travel, lodging, 
boarding of such persons are to be paid for in rupees in India for which general 
permission has been granted. In cases where expenses for travel to India and back as 
also expenses for internal travel, lodging, boarding etc., have been paid for by the non-
resident, it would be in order for authorised dealers to allow remittances in 
reimbursement of such expenses incurred by the non-resident concerned on production 
of appropriate documentary evidence in support of the amount sought to be remitted, 
provided such expenses are to be met by the applicant as per the contract.  
 
Issue of foreign currency notes  
 
In addition to travellers cheques, drafts etc., to foreign tourists/transit passengers against 
reimbursement in any permitted currency by banks abroad or against surrender of 
foreign currency drafts/cheques by the applicants, authorised dealers can now issue 
foreign currency notes not exceeding US $ 500 or its equivalent to foreign 
tourists/students against inward remittances received in their favour. While foreign 
currency notes may be issued to foreign tourists freely, in the case of foreign students 
studying in India these may be issued when they are going abroad during vacation or 
after completing their studies in India, after verification of their journey tickets.  
 
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
 
Press Release : 1997-98/754  
 