October 8, 1998
RBI holds Open House with
SSIs in Eastern Region
An Open House Discussion with Small Scale Industrial Units (SSIs) in Eastern
Region was held at Bhubaneswar on October 5, 1998. Shri Jagdish Capoor , Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Shri C.T.Benjamin, Secretary (SSI), Ministry of Industry,
Chariman and Managing Director, Executive Director, Chairman and Managing Directors
and Executives of various Commercial Banks, representatives of Small Industries
Development Bank of India and various Government officials attended the meeting. The SSI
entrepreneurs raised issues relating to inadequacy of credit to SSI units. The Deputy
Governor Shri Capoor mentioned that the RBI and the Government of India have taken a
number of policy initiatives to boost the flow of credit to SSI units. Banks have also
expanded credit to this sector which has practically doubled during the last 5 years.
Further, the problems relating to flow of credit to SSI were recently looked into by a
high level committee headed by Shri S.L. Kapoor, former Secretary to the Government of
India. Based on the recommendations of the committee, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to
take appropriate action for implementation of the committee's recommendations relating to
delegation of more powers to branch managers to grant ad-hoc limits, simplification of
application forms freedom to banks to decide their own norms for assessment of credit
requirements, opening of more specialised SSI branches, enhancement in the limit for
composite loans to Rs. 5 lakh, strengthening the recovery mechanism paying more attention
to the backward states, special programmes for training branch managers for appraising small
projects and making customers grievance machinery more transparent and simplifying the
procedures for handling complaints and their monitoring.
Representatives of SSI complained of non-availability of timely and adequate credit.
According to them delayed credit and under financing were the main reasons of sickness in
SSIs.
Shri Capoor suggested that about 20/25 cases of sickness in the SSI sector may be
taken up and studied by a group consisting of Shri A.A.Rao, Chief General Manager, Reserve
bank of India, Bhubaneswar office, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India, Managing
Director, Orissa State Finance Corporation and a representative of SSI associations to find
out the basic reasons for sickness in SSI units in the State and draw lessons for the future.
Shri Capoor also, exhorted bankers to have more interaction with SSI entrepreneurs to
bridge perception gap between Bankers and borrowers. He also suggested that instead of
merely looking at the credit-deposit ratio, banks should ensure that no viable proposal was
denied credit as that would be a more meaningful way of looking at this problem.
(Alpana Killawala)
General ManagerPress Release : 1998-99/431