` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
January 08, 1998 
RBI announces simplification of procedures for Foreign Direct Investment 
In a major drive to simplify procedures for foreign direct investment under the 
"automatic" route, RBI has dispensed with the need for its prior approval for such 
proposals. Indian companies have been given general permission to accept investments 
under this scheme as per policy guidelines laid down by the Government of India.  
In terms of the policy of the Government of India, Indian companies engaged in 
manufacturing items falling under priority industries and certain other approved activities 
are permitted to invite investment from foreign collaborators for starting new ventures or 
for expanding existing ones. As a part of this policy, an "automatic approval route" is 
available for getting quick approvals for foreign investment in those priority areas. 
Government of India have recently revised/recast list of industries included in Annexure 
III which are eligible for foreign investment under automatic route vide Ministry of 
Industry's Press Note No.14 dated 8th October 1997.  
2. In terms of this Press Note, approval for foreign investment will be freely 
available upto 50%, 51% and 74%, in respect of items/activities listed in Part A, B 
and C respectively of the list enclosed with the said Press Note dated 8th 
October 1997.  
3. According to the present procedure in vogue, the applicant Indian companies are 
to lodge applications in Form FC(RBI) with the Central Office of the RBI, Mumbai 
to get an "in principle" permission for foreign investment through the automatic 
route. Thereafter, the Indian company has to approach the concerned Regional 
Office of RBI to obtain permission under FERA by producing documentary 
evidence for receipt of consideration in foreign exchange, before the issue of 
shares  
4. In order to simplify the procedure under the automatic route of RBI for foreign 
ivestment, RBI has now decided to grant general permission under FERA to 
obviate the necessity for the aforesaid companies approaching RBI for 
permission before getting inward remittance and issuing of shares in India to the 
foreign investors. Necessary Notification under FERA, to give effect to the 
revised simplified procedure is under issue. After the revised procedure comes 
into effect, with the issue of Notification under FERA, companies getting foreign 
investment under the automatic route will not require prior clearance from 
Reserve Bank of India for this purpose. These companies will however have to 
file the required documents with the concerned Regional Office of the RBI within 
30 days after issue of shares to foreign investors.  5. The proposed general permission would cover only Foreign Direct Investment 
under the "automatic route of RBI". As regards investment proposals requiring 
approval of FIPB and for NRI investment, the existing procedure will continue.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/595  
 