 
28 Aug 1998 
 
Bank Finance against shares and debentures 
 
 
DBOD No. ........ Dir.BC.90/13.07.05/98 
28 August 1998   
  6 Bhadra 1920 (Saka)   
All commercial banks   
Dear Sir,   
Bank Finance against shares and debentures - Master 
Circular   
As you are aware the Reserve Bank of India has, from time 
to time, issued a number of 
guidelines/instructions/directives to banks in regard to 
 
advances against shares. To enable banks to have the 
current instructions at one place, a Master Circular 
containing all existing guidelines on the subject has been 
prepared and is enclosed. We advise that this Master 
Circular supersedes all the previous instructions contained 
in the Circulars issued by the RBI so far.   
Please acknowledge receipt.   
Yours faithfully,   
Sd/-   
(Radhe Shyam)   
Additional Chief General Manager   
  
   
  
  
Advances against Shares, Units, Debentures and Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU) Bonds 
   
1.  General Guidelines:   
The Annexure lays down the general guidelines to be followed by 
banks in all cases of grant of advances against shares and 
debentures/bonds.  
   
2. Advances against security of shares/debentures/bonds may be given to individuals, share and stock brokers and market makers, as per 
guidelines detailed in paragraphs 3 to 6 below. In regard to loans to 
other borrowers, banks may please refer to paragraphs 7 and 8 below. 
Paragraph 9 relates to advances against units of mutual funds.  
   
3. Advances to individuals    
Banks may grant advances against the security of shares, debentures 
or bonds to individuals subject to the following conditions:   
i. Purpose of the Loan: Loans against shares, debentures and 
bonds of public sector undertakings (PSUs) may be granted to 
individuals to meet contingencies and personal needs or for 
subscribing to rights or new issues of shares/debentures/bonds 
or for purchase in the secondary market, against the security of 
shares/debentures/bonds held by the individual.  
ii. Amount of advance: Loans against the security of shares, 
debentures and PSU bonds if held in physical form should not 
exceed the limit of Rs. 10 lakhs per borrower. The limit of Rs. 10 
lakhs has been enhanced to Rs. 20 lakhs if the securities are held 
in dematerialised form.   
iii. Margin : Banks should maintain a minimum margin of 50 percent 
of the market value of equity shares/convertible debentures held 
in physical form. In the case of shares/convertible debentures 
held in dematerialised form, a minimum margin of 25 percent 
should be maintained. These are minimum margin stipulations 
and banks may stipulate higher margins for shares whether held 
in physical form or dematerialised form. The margin 
requirements for advances against preference shares/non-
convertible debentures and bonds may be determined by the 
banks themselves.   
iv. Lending policy : Each bank should formulate with the approval of 
the Board a Lending Policy for grant of advances to individuals 
against shares/debentures/bonds keeping in view the general 
guidelines given in the Annexure as applicable to such advances. 
Banks should obtain a declaration from the borrower indicating 
the extent of loans availed of by him from other banks as input 
for credit evaluation. It would also be necessary to ensure that 
such accommodation from different banks is not obtained 
against shares of a single company or a group of companies. As 
a prudential measure, each bank may also consider laying down 
an aggregate limit of such advances.   
   
4. Advances to share and stock brokers   
i. Banks and their subsidiaries should not undertake financing of `Badla’ transactions.  
ii. Share and stock brokers may be provided need based overdraft 
facilities/line of credit against shares and debentures held by 
them as stock-in-trade. A careful assessment of need based 
requirements for such finance should be made taking into 
account the financial position of the borrower, operations on his 
own account and on behalf of clients, income earned, the 
average turnover period of stocks and shares and the extent to 
which the broker’s funds are required to be involved in his 
business operations. Large scale investment in shares and 
debentures on own account by stock and share brokers with 
bank finance, should not be encouraged. The securities lodged 
as collateral should be easily marketable.  
iii. The ceiling of Rs.10 lakhs/Rs.20 lakhs for advances against 
shares/debentures to individuals will not be applicable in the 
case of share and stock brokers and the advances would be need 
based.  
iv. Banks may grant working capital facilities to stock brokers 
registered with SEBI and who have complied with capital 
adequacy norms prescribed by SEBI/Stock exchanges to meet 
the cash flow gap between delivery and payment for DVP 
transactions undertaken on behalf of institutional clients viz. Fis, 
FIIs, mutual funds and banks. The duration of such a facility will 
be short and would be based on an assessment of the financing 
requirements keeping in view the cash flow gaps, the broker’s 
funds required to be deployed for the transaction and the overall 
financial position of the broker. The utilisation will be monitored 
on the basis of individual transactions. Margins may be 
determined by the banks themselves and banks may institute 
adequate safeguards and monitoring mechanisms.   
v. Banks may issue guarantees on behalf of share and stock 
brokers in favour of stock exchanges in lieu of security deposit 
to the extent it is acceptable in the form of bank guarantee as laid 
down by stock exchanges. Banks may also issue guarantees in 
lieu of margin requirements as per stock exchange regulations. 
The bank should assess the requirement of each applicant 
borrower, observe usual and necessary safeguards including the 
exposure ceilings.   
vi. The requirement relating to transfer of shares in bank’s name in 
respect of shares held in physical form mentioned in paragraph 
(vii) in the Annexure shall not apply in respect of advances 
granted to share and stock brokers provided such shares are 
held as security for a period not exceeding nine months. In the 
case of dematerialised shares, the depository system provides a 
facility for pledging and banks may avail themselves of this 
facility and in such cases there will not be need to transfer the shares in the name of the bank irrespective of the period of 
holding. The share and stock brokers are free to substitute the 
shares pledged by them as and when necessary. In case of a 
default in the account, the bank should exercise the option to get 
the shares transferred in its name.   
vii. Banks shall grant advances only to share and stock brokers 
registered with SEBI and who comply with capital adequacy 
norms prescribed by SEBI/Stock Exchanges.   
   
5. Bank Finance for Market Makers   
Banks may provide need based finance to meet the genuine credit 
requirements of approved Market Makers. For this purpose, they should 
lay down appropriate norms for financing them including exposure 
limits, method of valuation, etc. They should also follow the guidelines 
given below:   
a. Market Makers approved by stock exchange would be eligible for 
grant of advances by scheduled commercial banks.  
b. Market Making may not only be for equity but also for debt 
securities including State and Central Government securities.  
c. Banks should exercise their commercial judgement in 
determining the need based working capital requirements of 
Market Makers by taking into account the Market Making 
operations.  
d. Banks may prescribe normal prudential margin based on their 
commercial judgement while extending advances to Market 
Makers.  
e. Banks may accept, as collateral for the advances to the Market 
Makers, scrips other than the scrips in which the market making 
operations are undertaken.  
f. Securities offered as collateral may include 
shares/debentures/bonds/units of mutual funds including UTI as 
well as securities of Central and State Governments.  
g. Banks should ensure that advances provided for Market Making 
are not diverted for investment in shares other than the scrip 
earmarked for Market Making purpose. For this purpose, a 
suitable follow-up and monitoring mechanism must be evolved.  
h. The ceiling of Rs.10 lakhs/Rs.20 lakhs for advances against 
shares/debentures to individuals will not be applicable in the 
case of Market Makers.  
   
6.  Each bank should lay down a detailed loan policy for granting 
advances to Stock Brokers and Market Makers and also a policy for 
grant of guarantees on behalf of brokers which should keep in view the general guidelines given in the Annexure and include inter alia, the 
following:   
• purpose and use of such advances/guarantees  
• pricing of such advances  
• control features that specifically recognise the unique 
characteristics and risks of such financing  
• margins to be maintained  
• method of valuation of collateral  
• frequency of valuation of shares and other securities taken as 
collateral. Frequency of valuation of shares may at least be once 
in a quarter.  
• guidelines for transfer of shares in bank’s name  
• maximum exposure for individual credits (within the RBI 
prescribed prudential Single Borrower Limit). The Board may 
also consider laying down a limit on the aggregate exposure of 
the bank to this sector.  
• the aggregate portfolio, its quality and performance should be 
reviewed   
and put up at least on a half-yearly basis to the Board. 
   
7. Advances to other borrowers against shares/debentures/bonds   
The question of granting advances against primary security of shares 
and debentures including promoters shares to industrial, corporate or 
other borrowers should not normally arise. However, such securities 
can be accepted as collateral for secured loans granted as working 
capital or for other productive purposes from borrowers other than 
NBFCs. In such cases banks may increasingly accept shares in 
dematerialised form. Banks may accept shares of promoters only in 
dematerialised form wherever demat facility is available.   
In the course of setting up of new projects or expansion of existing 
business or for the purpose of raising additional working capital 
required by units other than NBFCs, there may be situations where 
such borrowers are not able to find the required funds towards margin, 
pending mobilisation of long term resources. In such cases, there 
would be no objection to the banks obtaining collateral security of 
shares and debentures by way of margin. Such arrangements would be 
of a temporary nature and may not be continued beyond a period of 
one year. Banks have to satisfy themselves regarding the capacity of 
the borrower to raise the required funds and to repay the advance 
within the stipulated period.  
   
8. Bank Loans for Financing Promoters contribution   
The promoters’ contribution towards the equity capital of a company 
should come from their own resources and the bank should not normally grant advances to take up shares of other companies. 
However, banks are permitted to extend loans to corporates against the 
security of shares (as far as possible in dematerialised form) held by 
them to meet the promoters’ contribution to the equity of new 
companies in anticipation of raising resources subject to the following 
terms and conditions, in addition to the general guidelines given in the 
Annexure:   
i. The margin and period of repayment of the loans may be 
determined by the banks.  
ii. Loans sanctioned to corporates for meeting promoters’ 
contribution should be treated as banks’ investments in shares 
and would thus come under the ceiling of 5 per cent of the 
incremental deposits of the previous year prescribed for 
investments in shares/convertible debentures of PSUs, corporate 
bodies, units of mutual fund schemes and in equity of dedicated 
venture capital funds meant for information technology.  
iii. With the approval of the Boards of Directors, the banks should 
formulate internal guidelines with appropriate safeguards for this 
purpose.  
iv. Under the refinance scheme of Export-Import Bank of India, the 
banks may sanction term loans on merits to eligible Indian 
promoters for acquisition of equity in overseas joint 
ventures/wholly owned subsidiaries, provided the term loans 
have been approved by the EXIM Bank for refinance.  
   
9. Advances against Units of mutual funds   
While granting advances against Units of mutual funds including Units 
of UNIT 64 Scheme of UTI, the banks should follow the guidelines given 
below.   
i. The Units should be listed in the Stock Exchanges or repurchase 
facility for the Units of mutual fund should be available at the 
time of lending.  
ii. The Units should have completed the minimum lock-in-period 
stipulated in the relevant scheme.  
iii. The amount of advances should be linked to the Net Asset Value 
(NAV) /repurchase price or the market value, whichever is less 
and not to the face value.  
iv. The advance would attract the quantum and margin requirements 
as applicable to advance against shares and debentures 
wherever stipulated. The margin should be calculated on the 
NAV/repurchase price or market value, whichever is less.  
v. The advances should be purpose-oriented, taking into account 
the credit requirement of the investor. Advances should not be granted for subscribing to or boosting up the sales of another 
scheme of the mutual funds or for the purchase of 
shares/debentures/bonds.  
   
10. Reporting of advances against shares/debentures/bonds   
Banks should submit in the enclosed Format details of advances 
granted by them against shares and debentures as on the last 
Reporting Friday of each Quarter viz. March, June, September and 
December. The Returns should reach the Reserve Bank of India (DBOD, 
th
Central Office) not later than the 15 of the succeeding month of the 
Quarter to which it relates.  
   
  
Annexure 
General guidelines applicable to advances against 
shares/debentures/bonds 
i. Statutory provisions regarding the grant of advances against shares contained in 
Sections 19 (2) and (3) and 20 (1) (a) of the Banking Regulation Act 1949 should be 
strictly observed. Shares held in dematerialised form should also be included for 
the purpose of determining the limits under Section 19 (2) and 19 (3) ibid.  
ii. Banks should be concerned with what the advances are for, rather than what the 
advances are against. While considering grant of advances against 
shares/debentures banks must follow the normal procedures for the sanction, 
appraisal and post sanction follow-up.  
iii. Advances against the primary security of shares/debentures/bonds should be kept 
distinct and separate and not combined with any other advance.  
iv. Banks should satisfy themselves about the marketability of the shares/debentures 
and the networth and working of the company whose shares/debentures/bonds are 
offered as security.  
v. Shares/debentures/bonds should be valued at prevailing market prices when they 
are lodged as security for advances.  
vi. Banks should exercise particular care when advances are sought against large 
blocks of shares by a borrower or a group of borrowers. It should be ensured that 
advances against shares are not used to enable the borrower to acquire or retain a 
controlling interest in the company/companies or to facilitate or retain inter-
corporate investments.  
vii. No advance against partly paid shares shall be granted. Whenever the limit/limits 
of advances granted to a borrower exceeds Rs. 10 lakhs, it should be ensured that 
the said shares/debentures/bonds are transferred in the bank’s name and that the 
bank has exclusive and unconditional voting rights in respect of such shares. For 
this purpose the aggregate of limits against shares/debentures/bonds granted by a 
bank at all its offices to a single borrower should be taken into account. Where 
securities are held in dematerialised form, the requirement relating to transfer of 
shares in bank’s name will not apply and banks may take their own decision in this 
regard. Banks should however avail of the facility provided in the depository 
system for pledging securities held in dematerialised form under which the 
securities pledged by the borrower get blocked in favour of the lending bank. In 
case of default by the borrower and on the bank exercising the option of 
invocation of pledge, the shares and debentures get transferred in the bank’s 
name immediately.  viii. Banks may take their own decision in regard to exercise of voting rights and may 
prescribe procedures for this purpose.  
ix. Banks should ensure that the scrips lodged with them as security are not 
stolen/duplicate/fake/benami. Any irregularities coming to their notice should be 
immediately reported to RBI.  
x. The Boards of Directors may decide the appropriate level of authority for sanction 
of advances against shares/debentures. They may also frame internal guidelines 
and safeguards for grant of such advances.  
xi. Banks operating in India should not be a party to transactions such as making 
advances or issuing back-up guarantees favouring other banks for extending 
credit to clients of Indian nationality/origin by some of their overseas branches, to 
enable the borrowers to make investments in shares and debentures/bonds of 
Indian companies.  
Explanatory notes  
   
( i ) "Shares" mean and include shares and stocks of every description. 
( ii 
"Debenture" means the same as defined in the Companies Act,1956.  
) 
( iii "Share broker" means a share broker who is registered with SEBI and 
) is a member of a recognised stock exchange.  
( iv "Advances" include cash credit, overdraft, loans and advances of every 
) description. 
(v ) "Advances against security of shares/debentures, include all types of 
advances against shares/debentures whether by way of principal 
security or collateral security. 
Advsha1 -my file 
  Format (vide Para 10)  
Statement of Aggregate Credit Limits of Rs.1 lakh and above against the security/collateral 
of shares, debentures and public sector bonds and outstandings thereagainst as on the 
last Reporting Friday of March/June/September/December  
 
Name of the Bank:  
(Amount in lakhs of rupees)   
A  B C D  E 
Category Aggregate  Total Of `C’ Advances Other purposes 
of limits outstandings extended for 
borrowers sanctioned further 
investments in 
shares,debentures 
and public sector 
bonds 
No.of Amt. No.of Amt. No.of Amount  No.of Amount  
 
parties parties parties parties 
          
 
   
a) Individuals  
 
  
b) Investment   
firms/   
companies  
   
c) Share and   
stock   
brokers  
   
d) Trusts and   
endowments  
 
  
e) Industrial   
and trading   
concerns  
 
  
f) Others   
Total: 
:2: 
   
Note: 1. Only outstandings in respect of limits of Rs.1 lakh and above 
need be furnished.   
2. The limits may be by way of loan, overdraft, cash credit etc.  
3. Figures should relate to the last Friday of the month.  
4. Total of columns (D) and (E) should tally with (C)  
5. 'Individual’ will include advances to more than one person in 
their own names.  
6. 'Industrial and Trading concerns’ will include 
proprietorship/partnership firms andprivate/public limited 
companies engaged in trade or industry.   
 