` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
22-04-1998 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMEDATIONS 
 
1. The agreements and other covenants/documents to be completed are complicated and simplification 
is recommended as has been done by some banks, such as the State Bank of India whose format is 
at Annex III of the report. All banks may examine their systems and make modifications within two 
months, and report compliance to the Reserve Bank of India. (Para 6.05)  
2. The focus of credit appraisal should be an evaluation of the income stream of the borrower, and a 
comprehensive assessment of credit needs taking into account track record, credibility, capability, as 
well as technical viability of the proposal. Supportive measures are necessary as have been further 
indicated in paragraphs 6.37, 6.39, 6.44, 6.45, 6.54, 6.55 of the report. (Paras 6.06 & 6.07)  
3. To ensure quick disposal, at least 90 per cent of loan applications should be decided at the branch 
level. Banks may, therefore, review the position and suitably modify the powers of sanction delegated 
to the branch manager. (Para 6.08)  
4. Short term credit needs of the farmer should include all requirements directly and indirectly related to 
production, post harvest and household expenses. Repayment capacity should be assessed on the 
basis of aggregate household income from all sources including crop production and ancillary 
activities. The credit facility should be extended through a composite cash credit limit. The limit may 
initially be provided for one year but over time extended for a longer period and brought to credit 
atleast once a year. On credit balances banks would pay interest, and charge interest on the 
outstandings. Advances under such limits may be `reckoned' as advances to agriculture within the 
definition of priority sector.(Para 6.11 & 6.12)  
5. In line with the change in approach towards appraisal of loan proposals for lending recommended by 
the Committee, the forms accompanying the main application, especially, for investment credit should 
be simplified and made more relevant for focussing on the income stream of the farmer. It is 
recommended that the Reserve Bank of India may appoint an expert group to finalise the new 
forms.(Paras 6.13 & 6.14)  
6. While some minor investments of a medium term nature can be taken into account in the composite 
cash credit limit recommended at paragraph 5 above, investments of a major nature would still need 
a separate loan. In relation to the systems followed for term lending, the emphasis should be on 
whether in a given area an activity can be supported profitably, rather than obtaining abstract cash 
flows and other data based on projected technical parameters. (Para 6.14)  
7. During cash rich periods, farmers have a propensity to invest in gold, land, implements, livestock or 
incur expenditure of a consumption nature. As a result they are vulnerable during times of adverse 
price fluctuations and natural calamities. To address the issue farmers should be offered a liquid 
savings product with an appropriate return which should be inbuilt in the loan product so as to provide 
them a cushion during lean periods.(Para 6.15)  
8. The system of adoption of scales of finance for short term loans and unit cost of investment credit has 
led to distortions at the base level and introduced an element of rigidity in assessment of credit 
requirements. In view of the expertise developed by banks in financing agricultural operations, and in 
order to give them flexibility to take care of variations in the requirements of borrowers, the fixing of 
the scale of finance / unit cost may be decided by the concerned banks.(Para 6.16)  9. The system of disbursing agricultural loans, partly in cash and partly in kind has restricted borrower's 
choice and given rise to undesirable practices including submission of false bills and receipts. In order 
to foster an environment of trust, banks may disburse loans for agricultural activities on a cash basis 
only and discontinue the practice of obtaining bills / receipts of inputs / assets purchased.(Para 6.17)  
10. Insistence on No Dues Certificate (NDC) as an invariable precondition for sanctioning a loan is 
unnecessary and time-consuming. Where banks are conversant with the track record of the 
borrowers, obtaining a NDC should be left to the discretion of the lending banker.(Para 6.18)  
11. Without recovery at acceptable levels lending cannot be sustained. Recovery of dues has issues 
which are legal, administrative, as well as in which publicity is necessary. These issues are examined 
in paragraphs 6.19 to 6.23. Specific recommendations include requesting State Governments to set 
apart dedicated teams for recovery, improving the recovery climate through rurally oriented field 
publicity campaigns projecting the message that banks are willing to lend to viable borrowers, and 
unless funds are recycled lasting relationships cannot be forged through the credit mechanism.  
The accounting systems in banks need to focus on systems by which recovery is disaggregated by 
loan products, as well as by time so that it is possible for managers to determine which products are 
more viable and whether current recoveries are better than past dues. The branch managers also 
need to have a statement of defaulting borrowers more promptly than is possible under the existing 
procedure. (Paras 6.19 to 6.23)  
12. Apart from steps for improving collection of dues, the Committee recommends that tangible incentives 
be provided to farmers who are prompt in repayment. Banks should, design appropriate incentive 
systems including interest benefit or rebate to borrowers who repay their dues promptly. Besides 
incentives for prompt repayment, farmers who opt for a savings module linked to the loan product, 
may be given a finer fate both on the loan as well as on the savings product. (Para 6.24)  
13. Taking into account the procedural difficulties and the high cost of stamp duty connected with 
registering a mortgage in favour of a bank, State Governments may initiate steps to abolish stamp 
duty on mortgage of agricultural land for obtaining loans from banks. (Para 6.25)  
14. Unlike in urban areas, most land in rural areas is inherited and there are no title deeds. The original 
land records in the tehsil office are similar to a share depository and if a farmer has a pass book with 
an authenticated record of his land holding, the bank should accept the same as valid title for 
purposes of an equitable mortgage. (Para 6.28)  
15. In States where the Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions ( Banks ) Acts have 
been passed, bank loans should be secured through the mechanism of the declarations prescribed 
thereunder. States which have not passed the above legislation may consider doing so. In the interim, 
such States may issue administrative orders that declarations made by borrowers on the Talwar 
Committee model for charging their lands to banks may be noted in the revenue records so that 
banks can lend against the same. (Para 6.29)  
16. The value of security taken should be commensurate with the size of the loan and the tendency to 
ask for additional collateral by way of guarantors where the land has already been mortgaged should 
be discouraged. (Para 6.31)  
17. In order to give operational flexibility to the lending banker, margin, security and collateral 
requirements should not be prescribed by RBI or any other agency and should be left to the discretion 
of the lending banker. For small loans upto Rs.10,000, however, the existing guidelines may continue. 
(Para 6.32)  
18. The requirement to insure all assets purchased through bank loans is an imposition causing financial 
hardship to borrowers. The decision as to the kind of insurance to be taken should be left to the 
borrowers subject to statutory requirements. (Para 6.33)  
19. In order to inform farmers transparently of the amount and periodicity of the various fees and charges 
levied by banks, they should be given a statement of the facilities availed, separately indicating the 
fees, charges, etc. levied. The instructions regarding compounding of interest issued by RBI may be 
reiterated so as to ensure that these are invariably followed. (Para 6.34)  20. The internal supervision system of banks should provide for visits to a few service area villages and 
during such visits, inspecting officer should convene open meetings of farmers to assess their 
problems and difficulties. The CMDs of banks, during their tours to various States, should pay 
surprise visits to rural branches as this would provide top management with an idea of field level 
conditions.(Paras 6.35 & 6.36)  
21. A large portion of the branch manager's time is spent on compiling returns of various descriptions for 
different agencies. There is an urgent need to rationalise the number of returns and a detailed 
exercise should immediately be undertaken by banks to reduce unnecessary paper work including 
elimination of ad hoc returns which very often require data already provided elsewhere. In this context 
the MIS for monitoring agriculture and other advances developed by the Bank of Baroda may be 
taken as an example. (Para 6.37)  
22. Notwithstanding exceptions to the contrary, the morale of the rural cadre in commercial banks is low, 
commitment uneven and the sense of mission weak. This has to be addressed if rural lending is to be 
stepped up. (Para 6.38)  
23. The Government of India stipulation for a compulsory rural posting may be done away with and 
posting of staff to rural centres should be based on institutional needs to be decided by the 
management of banks. (Para 6.40)  
24. The performance appraisal system in vogue in commercial banks for rural branches should be 
revamped with a substantially reduced weightage for deposit mobilization. The appropriate indicators 
for performance measurement should be increase in outreach, measured by the number of new 
clients, volume of lending, assessed on the basis of incremental increase in the flow of credit and 
loan recovery as indicated by the volume of cash recoveries. The procedure outlined in paragraph 
6.42 may be adopted to operationalise the recommendation. (Paras 6.41 & 6.42)  
25. To bring about the desired behavioural change in rural lending and to strengthen the sense of mission 
of bank staff, a package of incentives encompassing foreign exposure, training in prestigious 
institutions within the country, weightage in promotion, posting to centre of choice, improvement in 
accommodation and educational facilities and corporate recognition of outstanding performance is 
recommended. These incentives are indicative and banks may evolve their own schemes for 
improving the morale of rural branch managers.(Para 6.43)  
26. Bank Training institutions need to design fresh interventions shifting their focus from the present 
activity specific / project based training programmes to those emphasising borrower appraisal 
including techniques for assessing the needs of the rural household in a holistic way vis a vis the 
income stream / repayment capacity. (Para 6.44)  
`On the job' exposure should be made a major training vehicle for new staff duly supplemented by 
formal training. The approach of Grameen Bank in making the trainees internalise the bank's 
philosophy of rural lending and poverty alleviation may be adopted with appropriate modifications to 
suit the Indian context. (Para 6.45)  
27. The non farm sector has a large unutilised credit absorptive capacity. Rural households generally 
pursue a number of activities, both agricultural and non agricultural, for supplementing their cash 
flows. These activities have modest working capital requirements and banks should design specific 
loan products for such activities by providing loans for short period upto three months, initially with 
weekly or fortnightly repayments. At the end of the period repeat loans for higher amounts and for 
longer periods could be offered depending on the repayment behaviour with inbuilt incentives by way 
of interest rebate on prompt payment. (Paras 6.47 & 6.48)  
28. Self Help Groups have proved effective intermediaries for the transmission of bank loans. Banks 
should give wide publicity to their preference for financing SHGs, sentisize regional heads and branch 
managers to the potential for good lending through this route, and provide training to branch 
managers in assessing the potential of SHGs and simplification of documents. (Paras 6.49 to 6.52)  
29. The Reserve Bank of India may direct banks to adopt the model set of documents prescribed by the 
Working Group on Non-Governmental Organisations and SHGs set up by RBI in 1994 pertaining to 
agreements between members, loan formats, application forms, etc. (Para 6.53)  
30. Upgradation of infrastructural facilities especially village market yards, rural roads and stable power 
supply will go a long way in expanding credit flow to the rural sector. The responsibility for maintaining 
public sector infrastructure should, where possible, be entrusted to local initiative. (Para 6.54)  31. The efficacy of credit depends on the extent and quality of integration between infrastructural 
facilities, technological innovations, research and extension support. Linkages should be forged and 
strengthened between extension workers, faculty of agricultural colleges, branch managers and 
Government departments at the local level through the various district fora. (Para 6.55)  
32. There is a need for branch managers to have a broad knowledge of agriculture and related activities. 
At many places, farmers are confused about the type of inputs to be used for crops and can be 
misled by input dealers / other suppliers. Banks should work out a system by which, information 
regarding the package of recommended practices for the cultivation of crops specific to their areas is 
disseminated on a regular basis. (Para 6.56)  
33. There should be greater involvement of panchayats in agricultural extension including provision of 
training facilities to volunteers and creation of user groups of farmers for acting as nodes for 
technology transfer. Wherever possible rural branches should link up their activities with farmer's 
Clubs initiated by NABARD. (Para 6.57)  
34. Corporate offices of banks may quickly undertake a review of the functioning of their Hi-tech 
branches, especially to identify those which are not working well due to inadequate expertise and / or 
lack of demand. The Hi-tech branches of banks should also be used to disseminate information 
relating to agricultural operations and specifically for providing technical information regarding 
cultivation of high value crops. (Para 6.58)  
35. The rescheduling of a loan instalment during times of natural calamities specifically in regard to a 
term loan should be based on the bank's assessment and should not inhibit the bank from extending 
short-term production credit to the farmer. (Para 6.59)  
36. In case of production credit, especially for farmers cultivating high value cash crops, a savings 
component should be built into the loan product to provide cushion during times of distress. The 
saving-loan linkage should be encouraged by offering a finer rate on the loan. (Para 6.60)  
37. Timeliness and adequacy of credit are critical to increasing the credit flow to agriculture. Small loans 
involve higher transaction and administrative costs. As a result, managers tend to look for larger 
loans where interest rates are deregulated, while banks seek to equalise the price differential by 
cross subsidisation. In effect therefore, regulated rates of interest operate as a barrier to the sanction 
of small loans. As has already been done in the case of cooperatives and RRBs, commercial banks 
should be free to fix the rates of interest for loans of all amounts. (Para 7.04)  
38. The issue of subsidy linked loan programmes was examined by the Committee and it was observed 
that the loan portfolios of banks linked to subsidy were usually sub-standard with recoveries below 30 
per cent while in regard to loans sanctioned according to the business judgement of bankers 
recoveries were excellent. In the implementation of subsidy linked credit schemes, emphasis usually 
was on achievement of targets and the quality of lending as well as impact of such schemes was very 
poor.  
39. A thorough review of existing systems is recommended as subsidy linked lending has proved 
unsuccessful and needs to be replaced by an alternative method. The Committee believes that the 
rural poor are viable and borrowers can be directly targetted by commercial banks through NGO/SHG 
intermediation coupled with extended micro credit working capital facilities to the non farm sector. 
There is adequate experience in India, as well as internationally that such lending can be done 
profitably on a large scale, given certain pre-conditions such as customer sensitive loan products, 
appraisal of projects consistent with assessment of borrowers, full discretion in selection therefor, 
improved methods of working and better follow-up after loan sanction. Bankers should be able to 
increase the access of credit to the poor consistent with productivity without dependence on subsidy. 
(Paras 7.06 to 7.10)   
40. With the progressive decrease in reserve requirements from 63 per cent to 39 per cent over the last 
five years, the lendable resources of banks have increased from 37 per cent to 61 per cent. The base 
in relation to which the target of 18 per cent for agricultural lending is fixed has thus doubled apart 
from the normal increase in such base. In order, therefore, to achieve the 18 per cent target banks 
have had to more than double their lending to agriculture during a period when agricultural production 
itself was growing at 2.1 per cent per annum. Furthermore, the adherence to the target for agricultural 
lending is calculated with reference to outstandings which decrease as a result of improved 
recoveries and when write-offs take place. Drawing conclusions on the flow of credit to agriculture 
only on this basis is somewhat misleading and unrealistic. The target for agricultural lending should 
instead be based on the flow of credit through preparation of Special Agricultural Credit Plans 
(SACPs), the objective of which should be to accelerate the flow as well as to substantially improve 
the quality of lending. The RBI may indicate annually the expected increase in the flow of credit over 
the previous year on the basis of which SACPs would be prepared. Once the system is in place the 
18 per cent target would cease to have much relevance. (Paras 7.12 & 7.13)  
41. There should be a substantial modification of the Service Area Approach (SAA) so as to provide 
borrowers a choice of banks as well as bankers a larger area of operation. Specifically, borrowers 
should be free to approach any branch of a commercial bank for credit and it would be for the latter to 
determine whether or not to do business with the borrower. Banks should be free to operate outside 
their service area and the responsibility of a particular branch for the credit requirements for a specific 
village should continue to be made in such a manner that every village is linked to a bank branch for 
its credit needs. Subject to the limitation above, changes in service area where necessary should be 
decided through mutual consultations amongst banks at the local level and RBI approval dispensed 
with. (Para 7.16)  
42. The agenda for discussions at the various fora created under the LBA/SAA viz. BLBC, DCC and the 
SLBC should be radically changed. There should be a shift from discussion on service area plans and 
allocation of targets to providing a forum for greater dialogue between banks and government 
agencies on matters concerning area development, implementation of new schemes, impact 
evaluation of technology absorption, identification of fresh schemes for credit dispensation. (Para 
7.17)  
43. About 20 per cent of lands cultivated at present are by oral tenants. If such tenants are brought within 
the purview of the banking system, there would be overall gains in income for the tenant farmers and 
agricultural productivity. A review of Land Tenancy Acts may be undertaken so as to permit renting of 
land without the owner losing property rights. (Para 7.18) 
 