` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Jan 31, 1998 
 
RBI modifies certain regulations for NBFCs 
nd
      Detailed regulations were issued on 2 January 1998 to ensure orderly functioning 
of the Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and for protection of interest of the 
depositors. Since then, in response to suggestions received from various sections, RBI 
has held detailed consultations with leading NBFC associations, financial experts and 
other professionals in order to remove any genuine problems that might arise in the 
implementation of the guidelines issued on January 2, 1998. In the light of these 
discussions, RBI has decided to modify some of the regulations. The modifications are 
as under : 
Limits on acceptance of deposits  
Equipment leasing and hire 
purchase finance companies 
2. The ceiling on quantum of public deposits as a multiple of net owned fund (NOF) in 
respect of equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies has been enhanced. 
Equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies having rating of minimum 
investment grade have also now been allowed to access public deposits. The revised 
limits are as under :  
 
Level of rating  Existing limits Enhanced limits 
 (As a multiple of NOF)  
AAA 3 times 4 times 
AA 2 times  2.5 times 
A 1 time 1.5 times 
Minimum investment Grade, i.e., 
-A (CRISIL & ICRA) 
BBB (CARE) 
BBB - (DCR India) NIL  0.5 times 
The requirement of rating and level of public deposits for loan and investment 
companies remains unchanged. Time for regularising the excess deposits 
3. In order to take care of the mismatches in cash flows, the time limit for 
repayment/regularisation of excess public deposits has been extended. Accordingly, 
NBFCs having excess public deposits as on January 1, 1998 have been allowed time to 
repay/regularise excess deposits till December 31, 2000 subject to the condition that 
rd
1/3 of the excess is repaid by the end of December every year so that the entire excess 
st
deposit is repaid/regularised by 31 December 2000.  
    During this period of 3 years, the equipment leasing companies and hire purchase 
finance companies which are rated investment grade or above and loan and investment 
companies which have rating of A or above have been allowed to accept/renew public 
rd
deposits subject to the above stipulations of reduction of excess deposits by 1/3 each 
year.  
    The equipment leasing companies and hire purchase finance companies which are 
unrated or rated below the minimum investment grade and loan and investment 
companies which are unrated or are rated below the specified grade of `A' are, however, 
allowed only to renew the maturing public deposits and are not allowed to accept fresh 
public deposits.  
 
Downgrading of credit rating  
 
4. In case the ceiling on public deposits gets reduced as a consequence of downgrading 
of rating, the resultant excess deposits should be repaid/regularised within a period of 12 
months.  
 
Prudential norms modified  
 
5. The provisioning requirements for hire purchase/leased assets have been modified. 
While loan and other credit facilities shall continue to be classified as NPAs for each 
borrower as per existing norms, the lease and hire purchase transactions may be 
classified independently on the basis of record of recovery in each account. In other 
words, in respect of borrowers having multiple lease/hire purchase facilities, NPAs will 
be calculated by taking into account the default in respect of relative account/s only.  
 
Net owned fund  
 
6. For the purpose of deposit acceptance and prudential norms regulations (including 
capital adequacy and credit/investment concentration norms), the definition of net owned 
fund has been modified to include preference shares which are compulsorily convertible 
into equity.  
 
Disclosure requirements  
 
7. The NBFCs are now required to disclose the level of their rating and the name of the 
rating agency in their application forms for public deposits.  
8. Other provisions of the regulations relating to ceiling on the rate of interest on deposits 
at 16 per cent per annum, payment of brokerage at two per cent of deposits, renewal of 
deposits, repayment of public deposits, liquid asset requirement and safe custody of 
securities with a scheduled commercial bank, submission of auditor’s report and capital 
adequacy requirement remain unchanged.  
 9. Necessary notifications are being issued separately which will be available on Internet 
website http://www.rbi.org.in.  
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/682  
 