` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 22,1998 
Operational issues - Recommendations 
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks  
6.01 In this chapter the Committee has set forth its views on the simplification of documentation and suggested 
indicative guidelines on the basis of which banks could devise fresh loan products for the farm sector. In the concluding 
portion of the chapter, a series of recommendations are made in relation to measures which are supportive for 
reformulating the credit delivery process.  
Procedure  
6.02 Applications for loans are made in pre-printed forms in the regional language and supplied free of cost. The forms 
conform to those suggested by the Working Group on Simplification of Forms and Lending Procedures for Loans to 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (Baldev Singh Committee) and are required to be submitted together with supporting 
documents generally to the branch to which the village is attached as service area.  
6.03 The loan application form has three parts. The main form is common to all types of agricultural advances and 
records the personal details of the borrower including his present income and expenditure as also the additional income 
likely to accrue from the proposed investment. The main form is supported by a set of activity / purpose - specific forms 
such as for sinking of a new well, construction of tube well, purchase of pump-set, livestock rearing, improvement to 
land and buildings, purchase of tractor, etc. Borrowers are required to complete only the form related to the activity in 
respect of which the loan is sought. A separate form is provided for renewal of short-term loan / cash credit limit.  
6.04 During its interface with borrowers, it was indicated to the Committee that the loan application forms were not 
complicated and could be filled up without much difficulty. A suggestion that came up in this regard was that educated, 
unemployed youth at the village level could be considered for appointment on a contract basis by banks to facilitate the 
filling up of loan application forms by borrowers. While some branch officials felt that the suggestion had possibilities, 
others were of the view that the arrangement may lead to such facilitators demanding regular employment on the one 
hand and indulging in undesirable practices on the other. In the circumstances, the Committee would leave this open 
for consideration by banks if deemed appropriate.  
The Committee is of the view that while the main loan application form is relatively simple to complete, the 
accompanying forms particularly those relating to investment credit are cumbersome. These forms are based, in the 
main, on the project evaluation approach to lending and require the borrower to furnish a large amount of information 
particularly relating to cash flows and other technical parameters some of which are not of much relevance for farm 
credit. This issue is further examined in para 6.14 of the report.  
Further, the agreements and other covenants/documents to be completed are numerous and unduly complicated. Thus 
a borrower is required to affix his signature/thumb impression at more than two dozen places on different documents in 
respect of a single loan. The Committee notes that some of the banks are attempting simplification of the 
documentation requirements. The State Bank of India has introduced a simplified agreement form which is taken in 
respect of all agricultural loans where a hypothecation charge is created over the borrower's crops , machinery, 
implements or other movable assets. The State Bank format is at Annex -- III . It is recommended that all banks 
examine their systems and make modifications within two months and report compliance to the Reserve Bank of India.  
6.06 The Committee believes that the basis of lending should be confidence in the borrower and that the focus of such 
appraisal needs to shift from purely project-based considerations to a holistic assessment of the income stream of the 
borrower. The Committee is aware that the approach suggested requires a psychological reorientation towards the 
farmers and involves intensive interaction at the local level. Such interaction has to be interwoven into the duty list of 
branch managers together with supportive measures including residence at the duty station, upgradation of expertise 
for providing basic counselling and information support to farmers, better computer / vehicular support and extensive 
training intervention.  6.07 In the committee's view, the pre-sanction appraisal and visit is an intermediate stage in the total interaction with 
borrowers. The object of such appraisal is to reconfirm - not establish - the status of the borrower, his credibility as 
perceived at the village level, his capability for taking up the activities proposed, his integrity, track record and 
creditworthiness and the technical viability of the proposal. In effect, therefore, the objective of the pre-sanction visit and 
appraisal is to establish that the borrower is better than the collateral and that the proposal is creditworthy.  
6.08 As regards the disposal of applications , the general view expressed was that branch managers were fairly quick 
in deciding cases and delays usually took place whenever applications were referred by branch managers to their 
controlling offices. On further enquiry, the Committee was informed that the powers of branch managers had been 
revised upwards, but this was not the uniform position across states as well as banks. As a rule of thumb, the 
Committee recommends that at least 90 per cent of the applications should be disposed of at the branch level. 
Irrespective of the scale of the branch manager, if the pattern of lending so warrants, the powers at the branch would 
need to be modified ; bank managements may therefore review the position branch-wise so as to adopt this approach .  
Proposed Lending System  
Present System  
6.09 A review of the loan products offered by banks shows a mix of the traditional and innovative approaches. While 
production requirements are met through crop loan, crop cash credit / crop overdraft facilities and variations of the 
agricultural credit card system, requirements for investment credit are taken care of under various æscheme - specific 
products. Some banks offer separate facilities for meeting consumption needs on a clean basis or against security of 
gold / silver ornaments while others are channelling small volume micro credit through the SHG / NGO mechanism or 
other group initiative ventures.  
6.10 Production credit is disbursed either as a demand loan or through the crop cash-credit mechanism. Under the 
former, loans are granted on a crop to crop basis against execution of fresh documents each season. The Committee 
notes that some banks have developed crop cash credit schemes with varying degrees of flexibility and demand 
sensitivity but appear to have extended the same selectively. Under this system, borrowers are sanctioned sub-limits 
on the basis of standard criteria (cropping pattern, scale of finance, land holding, etc.) under an aggregate limit. 
Drawals on the limit are permitted either in cash through debit slips or through banker's cheques for the `kind 
component'. Consequent on a sub-limit having been fully drawn, only credits are permitted into the account but no 
drawals are allowed on the ground that the amount required for cultivation has already been used. On making further 
enquiries, the Committee was informed that since farmers undertake seasonal activities and generate surplus only after 
harvesting and marketing of produce, the drawals are bunched at the beginning, and repayments at the end of the 
cropping season. Resultantly, such borrowers have no need to operate the account during the interregnum. The 
Committee feels that this is an oversimplification and sees no reason why farmers should not be allowed to use the limit 
as a regular cash credit .  
Proposed System  
6.11 Composite cash credit limit  
Under the existing system, the assumption is that the farmer would sell his crop shortly after the harvest to repay the 
loan instalment by the due date. For each crop the farmer would be required to make a separate application and 
complete the basic formalities for obtaining the same. It was represented to the Committee by farmers and bankers that 
the short term credit requirements must be assessed under a different methodology whereby the total family income 
through crop production as well as other ancillary activities must be arrived at and, based on the estimated repaying 
capacity, an annual limit for the family should be fixed. This limit should cover all aspects relating directly and indirectly 
to production including the need for seasonal as well as post-harvest/household requirements of the farmer. The 
Committee agrees with this approach as it is the absence of such a loan product that is responsible for farmers 
approaching informal agencies for meeting a portion of their credit requirements during the pre-harvest period or at 
other times of need.  
Under the recommended system bankers would need to make a comprehensive assessment of the cropping pattern, 
the production and other income, and before extending such a facility take into account the past repayment record. 
Such limits could be provided initially for a period of one year but over time become limits set for a longer period. This 
limit would require to be brought to `credit' at least once in a year. On credit balances, banks would pay interest and 
charge interest on the outstandings. The proposed system would be very similar to what is termed as `relationship 
banking' in other sectors. The advantages for the farmer are its simplicity, and for the banker, the rigour with which 
`need' is assessed for provision of the facility.   
6.12 The Committee recommends that the aggregate limits made available to farmers as indicated above may be 
counted as advances to agriculture within the definition of Priority Sector.  
6.13 Investment credit  
At present, investment credit is disbursed on an activity specific basis to farmers in the form of a variety of products 
including farm mechanisation, land development, minor irrigation, horticulture and plantation, farm forestry, production 
and processing of seeds, construction of cold storage, setting up of bio-gas plants, etc. for periods ranging from three to 
nine years depending upon the financial and economic parameters of the projects financed. For integrated projects, 
credit is available for post-harvest operations as well as for exports. In the main, the loan products are purpose specific, 
based primarily on the economics of the activity and the asset/liability, income/expenditure pattern of the borrowers.  
6.14 Some minor investments of a medium term nature can be taken into account in the production credit limit 
described above ; investments of a major nature would need a separate term loan. While production loan requirements 
are recurring in nature, farmers ordinarily do not make investments in equipments such as tractors or in plantation of 
orchards or in the digging of wells on an annual basis, and hence the procedures faced in making such applications 
would be sporadic and not regular. In relation to the systems followed for term lending, the forms prescribed need a 
thorough review as the expectations of cash flow which are provided for in the application form, are somewhat 
irrelevant to many of the activities undertaken and seem to be borrowed from the systems followed in lending to the 
small scale sector. For example, a mango orchard is viable based on expected fruit bearing capacity of the trees and 
this depends on the genetic quality of the plant, appropriate husbanding methods, as well as the seasonal weather 
conditions. What the banker requires is not an abstract cash flow but an assessment whether in the area in which such 
activity is undertaken, the growing of mango is or is not a profitable enterprise? This is the major aspect to be looked at 
and filling in of other details quite often is neither realistic nor of any assistance in assessing viability. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that banks may review the existing forms prescribed by them for project based activities and 
carry out such simplifications as may be deemed necessary on the lines suggested above. The Reserve Bank of India 
may appoint an expert group to finalise the new forms.  
6.15 The Committee notes that farmers, even those cultivating cash crops, do not save in conventional instruments and 
during cash-rich periods have a propensity to invest in gold, land, implements, livestock or incur expenditure of a 
consumption nature. As a result, farmers are generally vulnerable during times of adverse price fluctuations or natural 
calamities. In order to address this issue, the Committee suggests that banks may design a fully liquid savings module 
with an appropriate return and inbuild the same in the loan product.  
Scales of Finance  
6.16 The system of adoption of scales of finance for financing short-term requirements and unit costs for investment 
credit was reviewed by the Committee. During its interaction at the field level, a number of arguments were advanced in 
favour of abolishing the scales of finance/unit cost system. It was argued that the scales of finance are generally fixed 
as a fraction of the gross yield; that actual costs of cultivation are higher - in some cases much higher - than the scales 
fixed; that on account of the difference between the actual expenditure to be incurred and the limits fixed by banks, 
farmers have to either take recourse to outside borrowings or bring in unduly large resources by way of margin 
requirements; that unit costs have introduced an element of rigidity in the funding of agricultural projects; that in practice 
the system allows no leeway to take care of variations in the individual requirements of borrowers based on factors 
such as intensity of cropping pattern, quality of management and nature of assets .  
The Committee notes that the system was introduced at a time when there was a need to provide benchmarks for use 
of commercial banks for financing agricultural operations. Over time, commercial banks have developed adequate skill 
and expertise in financing production and investment credit and there does not seem to be any reason now to bind 
them - even indicatively - to such norms. Appraisal of the borrower and his requirements is an essential element of the 
lender's tool kit, and the time is now opportune to leave the matter to the judgement of commercial banks and it is 
accordingly recommended.   
Cash/Kind Component  
6.17 Another issue raised by farmers was that credit is disbursed only partially in cash and the payment is directly 
made by the banker to the supplier of inputs or the equipment purchased by the farmer. It was represented that such a 
system has led to distortions as the farmer's choice of dealer is restricted. This system has also led to undesirable 
practices, including submission of false receipts where the borrowers wish to misuse such loans. Farmers and bankers 
indicated that there are very few incidents of willful misuse and those wishing to do so could find a way in any system. It 
was also pointed out by farmers that borrowers of other categories in rural and semi-urban areas were trusted to utilise 
their bank limits, and no restrictions of such a nature were imposed on their operations. The Committee concurs with 
this view and recommends that the practice of insistence on bills and receipts be dispensed with and all loans be 
disbursed in cash.  
No Dues Certificate  
6.18 Under the present system, borrowers are required to submit No Dues Certificate while taking loans. The ground-
level position is that in many cases banks are fully knowledgeable about the track record of some of the borrowers. The 
imposition of this requirement in their case is both unnecessary and time-consuming .The appropriate course of action 
would be for the bank to satisfy itself regarding the credit status of the borrower . A No Dues Certificate should, 
therefore, be dispensed with as a compulsory requirement; whether or not a borrower should be required to submit 
such a certificate, and from which agency should be left to the discretion of the lending banker.  
Recovery of Dues : Legal Issues, Monitoring  
6.19 Recovery of bank dues is an ongoing activity and branch managers should have a system whereby they have a 
list of current dues so that action is initiated to make collections before the due date. It is generally the experience that 
when the borrowers are approached in time, collection is satisfactory. When defaults are of such a nature that legal 
recourse has to be taken, the options before the banks are to proceed with a civil suit, or approach the State 
administration for recovery under the Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions (Banks) Act. As 
compared to a civil suit, proceedings under the State Acts are quicker but the system is in need of improvement. It was 
pointed out by bankers that the revenue administration is busy with other matters which have a higher priority and 
recovery of bank dues are not attended to with urgency. A solution to this has been found in some States, where 
dedicated teams of revenue officers look after recovery of bank dues, and the cost of such teams is borne by the 
commercial banks. Furthermore, a small percentage of the collections are set apart for distribution as a bonus to the 
revenue staff. It is suggested that commercial banks request State Governments to set apart such dedicated teams 
where amounts due are large enough to justify expenditure on such teams. 6.20 Overdues are a phenomenon neutral 
to the type of credit agency. The Committee is of the view that the emphasis over time on directed lending and the 
achievement of quantitative targets particularly under subsidy driven credit programmes has defocused the attention of 
banks from the qualitative aspects of `genuine' appraisal-based lending resulting in loan defaults and gradual erosion of 
repayment ethics. The end result has been a disturbing growth in overdues which has hampered recycling of the 
resources of banks and eroded their profitability and viability. 6.21 While interacting with the field level staff of banks in 
different States the Committee observed that although more than six years have passed since the closure of the 
Agricultural & Rural Debt Relief Scheme (ARDR), banks continue to cite it as one of the major impediments in the flow 
of credit and of poor recovery even in respect of current loans. It was pointed out that the argument is fallacious, and 
that in respect of direct lending to agriculture where borrower identification is not restricted by the compulsions of 
subsidy linked credit, there should be no difficulty in quality lending .  
There is however a need for the overall recovery climate to improve . The Committee suggests that banks individually 
and / or collectively may mount a rurally oriented field level publicity campaign projecting the issue in a positive manner 
reiterating that funds are not a constraint; that banks are willing to lend to all viable borrowers, and for all feasible 
projects; that rural deposits are the source of bank loans, and unless returned can not be recycled, and that while 
subsidy is a one time affair, lasting financial relationships leading to development can only be forged through the credit 
mechanism. The impact of such a publicity campaign, creatively and sensitively structured, would go a long way in 
creating a healthy environment at the ground level .   
6.22 The Committee went into the related question of the Recovery Rate Indicator (RRI) being used by banks for 
reporting purposes. The reporting mechanism divides total collections (principal & interest) during a given period by 
total demand, a denominator consisting of amounts falling due during the period plus overdue amounts from prior / 
earlier periods. The present Recovery Rate Indicator, because it aggregates the old portfolio together with the new 
portfolio in a single summation, sheds little light on the question whether the recent lending is performing better than the 
old one. The use of an aggregate recovery rate also works against a proper division of management attention between 
collecting old overdues and managing the health of the newer portfolio.The Recovery Rate Indicator is also not 
disaggregated by loan product. Such disaggregation is necessary for being able to compare portfolio quality and other 
indicators for different categories of loans, and is an important tool for making decisions about product mix and portfolio 
management.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that banks should immediately redesign the system used by them at present 
on the lines suggested and obtain on-going data on collection ratios separately under Government sponsored schemes 
and direct lending together with similar information disaggregated by loan products so as to enable continuous 
assessment of asset quality, product mix & portfolio management.  
6.23 The present system under which a branch manager receives a report on `defaulter status' between three to six 
months after the loans have become overdue should be discontinued. The efficacy of the recovery process lies in it 
being initiated by the due date and not later. For this to happen, branch managers must have a statement indicating the 
defaulter list for the day on the basis of which they can initiate action and monitor the results. The Committee attaches 
considerable importance to this issue and suggests that action in respect thereof may be completed at the earliest and 
reported to the RBI.  
6.24 It was pointed out by field level bankers and others that in the existing system adequate provision does not exist to 
provide tangible incentives to farmers who are prompt in repayment of their dues to the bank. It was argued that a 
healthy system of recovery can be built up not only by giving a signal that defaulters will be dealt with severely, but also 
by placing a premium on prompt repayment. This suggestion has merit and the Committee, therefore, recommends that 
banks should design appropriate incentive systems including interest benefit/rebate to borrowers who repay their dues 
promptly. Further, in view of the savings module suggested by the Committee for being in-built into the loan product, 
banks may also consider providing a finer rate to borrowers who save under the product.  
Stamp duty & Mortgage  
6.25 An issue which needs to be considered relates to the levy of stamp duty on agricultural mortgages specifically in 
regard to the procedural difficulties involved and the high cost of stamp duty connected with registering a mortgage in 
favour of a bank . Most States levy Stamp duty on charge created / agricultural land mortgaged to a bank for obtaining 
a loan above a certain limit . Many of the States have either abolished such levies or granted substantial reliefs 
whereas others continue with high rates of such duties. It is the view of the Committee that stamp duty on agricultural 
loans inhibits the flow of funds to the sector by adding costs and procedures to all such transactions. The overall 
collection on such account is also not of such a magnitude as to cause a significant revenue loss to the States 
concerned .The Committee, therefore, recommends that steps be taken to abolish stamp duty on agricultural loans in 
all the States.  
6.26 The next question to consider is the security obtained by banks, and the procedure involved in the documentation 
of such security. The three main methods which are examined are a simple mortgage, an equitable mortgage and the 
creation of a charge through a declaration backed by a personal covenant.  
6.27 A simple mortgage is the method preferred by bankers but is the most complicated and expensive. As private 
foreclosure is not possible, banks have to go through a long process for having the lands mortgaged to them put up for 
auction, only to discover at the terminal stage that they are unable to find buyers in such an auction as no one usually 
comes forward to make a bid. Though a simple (registered) mortgage gives an apparent security, in reality the 
collection is dependent on other factors, the most important being the income stream of the borrower.  
6.28 The second method commonly in use is mortgage by deposit of title deeds as is admissible under Section 58 F of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Such mortgages are possible at centres notified by the State Governments. An 
equitable mortgage to become effective has the following sequence: intent on the part of the borrower to create 
security, the deposit of title deeds with the lending institution and the sanction & disbursement of loan, the security on 
which is the equitable mortgage . Such an operation is fairly simple as it does not involve registration and stamp duty.  However, during the course of discussions, bankers pointed out that, as most lands in the rural areas are inherited, 
there are no title deeds; whereas in urban areas such a title is created either through a sale or on allotment. An 
anomalous situation is thereby created since an urban resident from a village purchasing five acres of land near a city 
has a sale deed and hence a title, whereas a cultivator of the same village is deemed not to have an original title. The 
facility of an equitable mortgage is available to the farmer purchasing land, whereas others have to follow different 
methods.  
In this context, it may be stated that land records in India were finalised in recent times through `settlements': these 
settlements involved survey, mapping and recording the rights of cultivators. Statutory backing to such rights was given 
through the land revenue Acts in force in the various States. Such settlements ordinarily take place once in thirty years, 
but the `record of rights operations' is carried out every five years. The original copy of the record of rights is kept in the 
Tahsil Office while certified copies thereof are given to farmers for their record/use. An annual record is maintained with 
the village patwari. Many States have provided a `passbook' to the farmers, which is essentially an authenticated copy 
of the record of rights. The current document evidencing land holding at the village level, commonly known as the 
`khasra', records details such as the name/s of cultivators, land held, area, crops sown, charge / encumbrances and 
such other changes which may have taken place since the preceding year.  
It is the view of the Committee that the original land records are similar to a share depository, and if a farmer has an 
authenticated record of his land holding, banks should accept this as a valid title. Banks would no doubt have to verify 
the authenticity as well as charge/s created on account of past liabilities, but subject to a clear satisfaction on this count 
they should accept this for the purpose of an equitable mortgage in relation to agricultural lands. The acceptance of this 
recommendation would remove a genuine feeling of discrimination which farmers have as compared to their urban 
counterparts.  
The Government of Andhra Pradesh have declared most of the districts as eligible for mortgage by deposit of title 
deeds through an appropriate notification under the Transfer of Properties Act. It is recommended that other States also 
consider issuing notifications under this proviso.  
6.29 In States where Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions (Banks) Acts have been passed, it is 
possible for the borrower, through a declaration, to create a charge on the land in favour of the bank, and particulars of 
such a charge are registered in the record of rights by the village officer as well as in the records maintained at the 
district office. According to information available, most of the States have passed such Acts. Where such acts have 
been passed, it should be possible for banks to accept such a charge in lieu either of a simple or an equitable 
mortgage. The Committee, therefore, recommends accordingly.  
For such a system of declaration to work efficiently, it would be necessary for land records to be updated regularly. 
States which have not passed such Acts may consider introducing a system whereby declarations similar to those 
being accepted elsewhere are registered with the revenue authorities thereby giving the banker the benefit of such 
security. It should be possible for this to be done through appropriate administrative orders .  
6.30 The Committee, therefore, recommends that:  
I. Equitable mortgage may be taken at notified centres.  
II. In States where the Agricultural Credit Operations & Miscellaneous Provisions (Banks) Acts have been passed, bank 
loans should only be secured through the mechanism of declaration prescribed thereunder.  
III. States which have not passed the above legislation may do so.  
IV. In the interregnum, such States may issue appropriate administrative orders, so that declarations made by 
borrowers on the Talwar Committee model for charging their lands to banks may be noted in the revenue records.  
V. As a rule banks may take either an equitable mortgage or a declaration as per the Agricultural Credit Operations and 
Miscellaneous Provisions (Banks) Acts. A simple mortgage should be resorted to only when the above two alternatives 
are not available.  
6.31 A related issue is that banks often ask for the entire holding of a borrower to be mortgaged, even though in terms 
of value only a part of the holding would give the required security. Banks often ask for guarantors apart from the land 
which is mortgaged. It is the view of the Committee that the security taken must be commensurate with the loan. 
Ordinarily, if the repayment record of the borrower is acceptable there should be no need to ask for a guarantor.   
Margin / security requirements  
 
6.32 It was represented to the Committee that margin and security requirements should not be prescribed but 
determined by banks depending on the facts of the case. The Committee notes that for agricultural loans upto 
Rs.10,000/- no margin is stipulated while for loans above that amount, margin requirements vary between 15% & 25% . 
Security norms are also prescribed for production credit and investment credit separately and include documents such 
as pro note, hypothecation / mortgage deed and guarantee.  
 
The Committee has considered this issue in context of the need for expanding the discretionary authority of commercial 
banks in operational matters. It notes that originally relaxations in lending norms had been prescribed for loans below 
Rs.10,000/- in order to encourage the flow of credit to borrowers in this segment. It has, however, been found that in 
certain government schemes margin, security and/or collateral requirements are often determined by agencies other 
than banks. In our view this is a matter exclusively within the jurisdiction of the lending banker and recommends that in 
this regard there is no need for the RBI to make any prescription, except in relation to the smaller loans upto 
Rs.10,000/-.  
 
Insurance  
 
6.33 Under the present system, the borrowers are required to insure the assets purchased through bank loans. These 
assets fall under two broad categories: farm vehicles/equipments/implements and livestock. It was represented to the 
Committee that the compulsory requirement to insure assets purchased through bank loans was an undue imposition 
on the farmers and was causing them financial hardship. In regard to insurance of assets, therefore, the Committee is 
of the view that the choice should be left to borrowers as to the kind of insurance they want to take subject to statutory 
requirements, such as required under the Motor Vehicles Act.  
 
6.34 It was submitted to the Committee by farmers that banks levy inspection charges/folio fees, etc., without their 
being aware of the amount and periodicity of the same. Complaints were also voiced that in many cases that interest 
was being compounded even where there were instructions to the contrary. The Committee is of the view that the 
banker-borrower relationship demands transparency in mutual dealing, and recommends that the farmer should be 
given a clear statement on the facilities availed of by him, separately indicating various fees levied. As regards 
compounding of interest, banks may reiterate to branches that the instructions issued by the RBI in this regard may be 
strictly followed. The Committee believes that such a step would go a long way in establishing borrower confidence in 
the bank.  
 
Management Issues  
 
6.35 The Committee recommends that the internal supervision system of banks may provide for visits to a few service 
area villages covered by each branch so as to obtain feed back on the quality of interaction which branch officials have 
at the ground level. It suggests that during such visits inspecting officers should, invariably, convene open meetings of 
farmers to discuss their problems and difficulties. Opening of this direct forum of interaction between the bank and its 
clients will substantially reduce the number of complaints regarding banking services, apart from giving the 
managements a clear idea of the performance of their field level officers, and the quality of services provided by them.  
 
6.36 CMDs of banks may during their tours to various States also pay surprise visits to their rural branches. Such visits 
will send the appropriate signals to the field level staff. It is recommended that Chairmen make at least one such visit 
every month.  
 
Reporting Mechanism  
 
6.37 During field visits, it was indicated that a substantial portion of the branch/manager's time is spent on filling returns 
of various descriptions for different agencies including its controlling and head office. Branch managers themselves 
expressed their dissatisfaction at this state of affairs and submitted that if these returns could be telescoped their work 
would be greatly simplified. This would also render them free to attend to more important items such as establishing 
and maintaining village level contacts and supervising recovery initiatives. There is general agreement amongst branch 
managers and supervising officers that this be done. Some banks have attempted modifications. The Bank of Baroda 
as part of the Management Information System for Monitoring Agriculture and Other Advances have devised a modified 
reporting system by which, as against twenty-four returns submitted earlier, the number now required is only nine of 
which some are quarterly or half yearly. A brief note indicating the system followed as well as a statement indicating 
comparative position of returns submitted earlier and now alongwith the man days saved is indicated at Annex IV. It is 
recommended that a detailed exercise be immediately undertaken by all banks, and their reporting proformae modified 
so as to reduce unnecessary paper work which is being done by most branch managers thereby giving them more time 
focus their attention on core banking business.   
6.38 Devising ways and means of finding the right men and women, equipping them with appropriate skills, placing 
them in suitable positions and giving them the right incentives and motivational inputs has been a recurrent theme in 
the reports of earlier committees. Commenting on this issue, the All India Rural Credit Survey Committee wrote in its 
General Report that ô... paradoxical as it may sound, the problem of rural credit in India is not primarily one of rural 
credit. Rather it may be said to be one of rural minded credit The present Committee is of the view that though much 
water has flown since the Survey Committee presented its report, the statement made by it is still valid.  
 
In addition to skill and expertise, successful rural lending relies on a strong sense of mission. Such a sense is best 
nourished in a corporate culture that integrates profitability and efficiency into its objective of serving the poor, puts a 
premium on rural service, projects the work done by rural branch mangers as meaningful and of importance to the 
institution, and rewards performance by real incentives.The Committee notes that while some efforts appear to have 
been made at the institutional level on the above lines, rural branch managers are, in the main, forgotten soldiers. While 
being reasonably well equipped professionally, they do not perceive themselves as doing real banking but only sub-
serving the compulsions of targeted lending under subsidy driven programmes. They chafe at the fact that while, on the 
one hand they have little choice in the selection of borrowers, they are responsible, on the other, for good lending and 
high recovery rates. As a result, some of them tend to slow down on fresh lending while others circumscribe the loans 
given with a variety of certificates, receipts and other documents for `absolution' in case the loans go bad. Rural 
postings are viewed as lacking in `profile' and either considered as an institutional requirement which has to be 
complied with so that the incumbent can move on to a better job, or worse, as a signal for having been marginalised. As 
a result, and notwithstanding notable exceptions to the contrary, the morale of the rural cadre is low, commitment 
uneven and the sense of mission weak. This has to be addressed if rural lending is to be stepped up.  
 
The Committee observed that at many places branch managers preferred to stay at the nearest town / urban centre 
citing non-availability of residence facilities at the duty station as the reason. This argument is not convincing as even at 
places where such facilities are available, many branch managers do not stay there.  
 
Residence at the duty station is essential as this facilitates interaction and improves performance. Bank managements 
should work out appropriate systems to ensure that the officers posted in the rural areas stay at the centres of their 
posting .  
 
6.40 All bank officers are required to do a tenure in the rural branches as part of their career profile. While some banks 
endeavour to post relatively junior officers at the beginning of their career to the rural areas, others follow a seniority 
mix depending on the category of the branch and seniority of the officer. It was represented by bank managements that 
posting of staff to rural centres should be based on institutional needs and requirements and that left to themselves 
banks would be in a position to manage their cadres and ensure that appropriate postings are made at all rural 
branches. It was explained that the two year compulsion regarding rural posting has brought about aberrations in cadre 
management, and many officers just mark time in rural postings only to satisfy the two year criteria. The Committee 
feels that there is merit in the suggestion and recommends that the Government stipulation for a compulsory rural 
posting may be done away with and the issue of placement be decided by bank managements .  
 
6.41 The performance appraisal system in vogue in commercial banks does not substantially distinguish between 
branch performance at urban, semi-urban & rural centres and places a substantial weightage - formally and informally -
- on deposit mobilisation. The Committee is of the view that this is not reflective of the work involved , as on account of 
the near monopoly situation in rural areas, deposit growth is almost automatic and should be given minimal weightage 
in the appraisal system.  
The appropriate indicators to assess their performance should be:  
I. increase in outreach measured by the number of new clients,  
II. volume of lending assessed on the basis of incremental increase in the flow of credit, and  
III. loan recovery as indicated by the total volume of cash recoveries.  
The Committee is of the view that taken together these variables will reinforce behavioural change in the critical areas 
of mission: outreach, flow and recovery and also lend themselves easily for measurement.  
 
6.42 In order to operationalise the above recommendation, it suggests that a status report detailing the above indicators 
be given to each branch manager on the day he assumes charge in the case of new postings or as at the end of March, 
1998 in the case of serving incumbents. It further suggests that on the basis of systemic indicators in respect of the 
above variables each bank should project an anticipated annual increase and communicate the same to all branches 
clarifying that only performance above the stipulated levels will qualify branch managers for prima facie eligibility for the 
incentives.   
6.43 The Committee is of the view that a package of incentives should be available for rural branch officials and 
recommends as under:  
I. the top ten branch officials of each bank be sent abroad for training / attachment / field exposure with institutions and 
organisations in South East Asia and other parts of the world, or at foreign academic institutions which have strong 
rural development faculties.  
II. The next ten branch officials be deputed to prestigious management or rural development institutions within the 
country for similar exposure.  
III. Further, suitable notings be made in the service records of the concerned officers and given due weightage at the 
time of their being considered for promotion to the next higher grade.  
IV. Consequent on completion of their rural tenure, officials with distinguished records in rural service may be posted to 
a centre of their choice for a period not exceeding three years.  
V. Banks may make improvements in the type of accommodation provided at rural centres to branch officials.  
VI. The costs incurred on the education of children of branch officials having distinguished records in rural service may 
be subsidized upto a ceiling limit of 50% during an academic year.  
VII. Additionally, banks may set up/fund central schools at convenient places in the urban hinterland of their rural 
branches for providing education facilities to the children of branch officials.  
VIII. Outstanding performance may also be recognised by non-monetary incentives including certificates of merit, letters 
of appreciation from the Chairman, etc.  
The proposed incentives are only indicative and banks could enlarge or modify their scope depending on their 
assessment. What is important is that the eligibility for such incentives should be outstanding performance , objectively 
assessed.  
 
6.44 The programmes conducted at training centres run by banks have contributed towards improving skills and 
knowledge which, in turn, have helped to strengthen the rural financial system. The Committee is of the view that the 
present project based training approach has mainly been concerned with teaching branch managers the techniques of 
project evaluation without sufficient attention being paid to assessing the borrower, and his overall needs against his 
aggregate house-hold income, expenditure patterns and related matters. The system must be strengthened by 
programmes which emphasise borrower appraisal .  
 
6.45 The basic challenge of training ænewÆ staff is to organise an efficient and effective means of transferring 
knowledge from existing staff (who hold the knowledge) to new recruits. It believes that on-the-job training should be 
made a major training vehicle for new staff, supplemented by more formal training at the training centres. For new 
entrants, training should include a small amount of classroom work (from one to three weeks) and a longer stint as a 
trainee in a retail unit (from two to three months). In all cases, the training process should aim at mobilising a large part 
of the existing staff to participate in the transfer of knowledge, with field workers teaching new recruits their own jobs 
and working side-by-side with them for a few months. In this context, the experience of the Grameen Bank is relevant. 
Grameen has no formal training manual. Instead, its written training materials contain a list of questions about 
corporate objectives and operations that trainees are supposed to answer for themselves while they are in the field. 
Classroom time is devoted to discussing the answers which the trainees have found to these questions, and comparing 
field experiences. Much of what Grameen wants trainees to internalise involves its philosophy of rural lending and 
poverty alleviation. Trainees are required to undertake several specific field activities, which develop those attitudes 
and at the same time deepen their knowledge of the local economy. One particularly successful method involves a 
case study. Trainees are asked to find a poor woman, interview her and write her life history, considering her economic 
and social problems and coping strategies. They are also required to complete surveys of the economic and market 
activity of a particular village. Such devices contribute to the strong internalisation of institutional values even as they 
generate useful information for the trainee and for the Bank. Such an approach ,appropriately modified to suit our 
context would go a long way in improving the efficacy of the training interventions, and inculcating the right attitude and 
mindset in the cadre of rural branch staff and managers.  
 
Non-Farm Sector  
 
6.46 The press note issued by the Reserve Bank of India announcing the setting up of the Committee mentions that 
despite a significant expansion in the flow of credit to the agricultural sector since the inception of the economic reform 
process there is a perception that investment in agriculture, particularly non-farm investment has not kept pace with 
demand  6.47 Although the population dependent on agriculture continues to be around 62%, the share of agriculture in national 
income has fallen from 50% to around 30%. Compared to this, the growth of employment in the rural non-farm sector 
which covers 16% of the country's population has been 5.4% p.a. during 1978 to 1988 as against 0.92% p.a. in 
agriculture and 2% p.a. in the urban organised sector. If the overall goal for employment growth at 2.8% per annum for 
the decade 1991-2001 is to be achieved, it is estimated that employment in the rural non-farm sector will have to grow 
by an estimated 8.1% p.a. taking into account the anticipated employment growth in other sectors. The fact that the 
workforce in this sector has been growing at around a million a year is a good quantitative indicator of its credit 
absorptive capacity. The Committee believes that the greatest stimulant for the growth of the non-agricultural economy 
in rural areas is sustained agricultural growth. The linkages are clear but bear repetition. Firstly, a dynamic agricultural 
sector provides the inputs for processing both food and cash crops. Secondly, agricultural growth demands inputs and 
services from the local economy. Thirdly, it generates income surpluses, which translate into demand for various kinds 
of consumer goods and services. Apart from agriculture, the other primary sector activities which serve as an important 
basis for non-farm sector (NFS) livelihoods include livestock rearing, fisheries, forestry & mining.  
 
6.48 Rural households generally pursue a number of activities, both agricultural and non-agricultural, for supplementing 
their cash flows. These activities, which include small scale trading, micro industries, transport, etc., have modest 
working capital requirements and lend themselves admirably to bank finance. The Committee is of the view that banks 
should design specific loan products for this sector, which typically could initially provide loans for a short period upto 
three months, with weekly or fortnightly repayments. At the end of the period, the borrowers' requirements should be re-
assessed, and repeat loans of increasingly higher amounts for longer periods be offered, subject to the discipline of 
weekly/fortnightly repayment of interest/principal instalments. There should also be inbuilt incentives of interest rebates 
in case of prompt repayment. International experience shows that credit to borrowers engaged in such non-farm sector 
activities has a high turnover on account of rapid recycling of funds leading to increase in credit flows.  
 
Informal Sector  
 
6.49 The problems faced by the poor in dealing with formal rural financial institutions are many. The factors which 
constrain the capacity of the poor to borrow from the organised credit institutions have been: lack of skills, ignorance of 
economic opportunities and their inability to comply with procedural requirements. It is in this context that forging of 
linkages between the Self-Help Groups (SHGs) of the poor and the commercial financial institutions with Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) performing a range of intermediary functions has been explored in many 
countries.  
 
6.50 In 1992 a pilot project for linking of 500 SHGs with banks was launched by NABARD. The project has been fairly 
successful, particularly in the case of groups formed by women. Over 75 per cent of the SHGs supported so far are 
exclusively womenÆs groups. Based on this experience, banks were advised by RBI in April 1996 to consider lending 
to the SHGs as part of their regular lending operations.  
 
6.51 Under the present arrangements, banks can lend to SHGs which, in turn, make advances to their members. 
Alternatively, banks work through NGOs, which provide credit to SHGs to be passed on to their members. The route 
chosen by a bank depends upon the strength of the SHGs and the support they may need from NGOs. The main 
advantage to banks of their link with the SHGs and NGOs, is the externalisation of a part of the work items of the credit 
cycle such as assessment of credit needs, appraisal, disbursal, supervision and repayment, reduction in the formal 
paper work involved and a consequent reduction in the transaction costs coupled with recoveries of about 95 per cent . 
  
6.52 The Committee recommends that banks give wide publicity to their preference for financing self-help groups, 
sensitise regional and branch managers to the potential for good lending through this route and provide training to the 
branch managers in assessing the potential of SHGs and simplification of documentation.  
 
6.53 In relation to documentation, the Working Group on Non-Governmental Organisations and Self-Help Groups set 
up by the Reserve Bank in 1994 had recommended a model set of documents for agreements between members, loan 
agreement formats, loan application forms / related formats, etc. for adoption by the banks. Unfortunately, banks have 
not yet operationalised the suggested procedures. It is the view of the Committee that Reserve Bank may prescribe 
such formats for adoption by the banks uniformly.   
Other Related Issues  
6.54 There is a positive correlation between infrastructure and credit and upgradation of such facilities will expand 
financial flows to the sector. This is a part of an ongoing process of expansion, but the Committee would like to flag 
setting up of village market yards, improving the quality of rural roads and provision of stable power supply as 
deserving immediate attention. While one aspect is enhancing investment, the other relates to maintaining the 
investment made. The Committee is of the view that local management of resources needs to be encouraged, and the 
responsibility for maintaining public sector infrastructure should, where possible, be entrusted to private initiative. Such 
arrangements could be contemplated for maintenance of irrigation channels on the analogy of the water users' 
associations as well as rural electrification .  
 
6.55 The efficacy of credit depends on the quality of integration between infrastructural facilities, technological 
innovations, research and extension support. Such linkages are generally weak because different agencies tend to 
operate in a compartmentalised fashion with field level interaction being minimal. The Committee feels that such 
linkages should be forged through a positive effort at the various fora available at the district level.  
 
6.56 It was suggested that banks need to provide technical advice through recruitment of specialised personnel as was 
done by public sector banks when they first entered the field of rural credit. Over time, these specialised personnel 
have been absorbed in the mainstream. Another view expressed was that it is not possible for the banking system to 
have specialists in the various fields of activities it finances. What is important is a broad knowledge of such activities, 
and the dissemination thereof through appropriate modules prepared with the help of experts and extension agencies. 
At many places farmers appeared confused about the type and kind of input to be used for crops as the advice given by 
the agriculture department was sometimes at variance with the advice given by the input dealer; the bank which 
provided finance was not in a position to give any advice. Bankers, therefore, need to work out a system by which 
through word of mouth as well as printed booklets/pamphlets, package of practices for the cultivation of crops specific 
to their areas is disseminated on a regular basis.  
 
6.57 The Committee recommends greater involvement of panchayats in the provision of training facilities to volunteers 
and creation of user groups of farmers for acting as nodes for technology transfer. The Committee also commends the 
initiative taken by NABARD in forming farmers' Clubs and recommends that wherever possible rural branches should 
link up their activities with such clubs.  
 
6.58 Banks have increased the number of hi-tech branches to cater to the emerging capital intensive needs of the 
agricultural sector for financing projects in areas such as floriculture, mushroom cultivation, aqua culture, tissue culture 
and seed production. The Committee was informed that detailed guidelines on project preparation and appraisal have 
been issued to branches and model projects brought out by NABARD `circulated' as indicative references. It notes that 
certain banks have set up Agricultural Consultancy Service Cells, Research & Development Cells to assist 
entrepreneurs in the preparation of such projects and for conducting pre-feasibility studies for identifying new ventures. 
Notwithstanding the arrangements put in position, the flow of credit to the Hi-Tech sector is not significant. Corporate 
offices of banks may quickly undertake a critical review of the functioning of their hi-tech branches which are not 
working well because of inadequate expertise as well as lack of demand on account of the vulnerable viability of many 
projects. The Committee further believes that these branches should also be used for dissemination of information 
regarding agricultural operations and specifically for providing technological inputs for cash and other high value crops. 
  
6.59 The rescheduling of a loan instalment specifically in regard to a term loan should be based on the bank's 
assessment and the fact that a borrower has defaulted in this regard due to factors beyond his control should not inhibit 
the bank from extending short-term production credit to him. Thus, if a borrower defaults on the instalment of a pump 
set on account of, say, failure of crops due to draught and if the banker's assessment is that in the next production 
cycle he will be able to generate the necessary surplus to repay the said instalment, the bank should continue the 
support for seasonal agricultural operations. In such cases, it should view the default in the totality of circumstances 
and not allow the emergence of a non-performing asset (NPA) to stand in the way of rescheduling the loan. In making 
this recommendation the Committee would like to point out that in industrial financing working capital limits are 
continued at the discretion of banks by suitable reschedulement of the term loan when in arrears.  
 
6.60 The conversion of short-term loans to medium-term loans during a period of natural calamity poses problems of a 
different kind especially when in a production cycle of 5 to 7 years conversion is required to be resorted to on more than 
one occasion with the borrower's ability to repay diminishing progressively. This is particularly so in case of farmers 
cultivating high value cash crops. The Committee recommends that in case of production credit, specifically in cash 
crop areas, a savings component should be in-built in the loan product to provide for a repayment cushion during times 
of distress. As already stated earlier in the report, such a linkage could be encouraged by giving the saver-borrower a 
finer rate on the loan product.  
 
Report of The High-Level Committee on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks 