October 12, 1998
In con sultation with the Reserve Bank of India, the Government of India has worked
out an arrangement to cover the exchange risk under the Resurgent India Bond (RIB)
Scheme. The details of the arrangement are
 The Reserve Bank will open a separate account titled 'RIB-Maintenance of Value
Account' (RIB-MOV) to enable the State Bank of India (State Bank) and the
Government to make contributions to this account every year on account of exchange
 Commencing September 1998, at the end of September every year, until the
redemption of the bonds, the exchange loss/gain will be worked out as the difference
between the weighted average rate at which the currencies were initially acquired by
the Reserve Bank and the prevailing market rate.
 As per the arrangement between the Government and the State Bank, the exchange
loss, if any, will be borne by the State Bank to the extent of one per cent per annum
on the rupee equivalent of the amount initially credited and exchange loss up to one
per cent per annum (compounded annually) of the rupee equivalent of the interest
accrued/paid thereon. Any loss in excess of this percentage would be borne by the
Government.
 The Government will issue non-negotiable, non-interest bearing special securities
without specified maturity in favour of the Reserve Bank to the extent of exchange
loss to be borne by the Government under the Scheme. The proceeds of the securities
would be deposited in the RIB-MOV Account.
 The State Bank on its part will pay its share of the exchange loss for the year, if any,
to the credit of RIB-MOV Account.
 For payment of interest/repayment of the bonds, the Reserve Bank would sell foreign
currencies directly to the State Bank at the then prevailing exchange rate. The State
Bank would pay the amount initially received by it and the balance will be met out of
the RIB-MOV Account.
 The Scheme would terminate as at the end of September 2003. However, a period of
six months ending March 2004 would be allowed for final settlement of the accounts.
 It is clarified that the MOV arrangement is restricted to the transactions between the
Government, the State Bank, and the Reserve Bank in respect of the RIB scheme. All
forex market (including those out
of RIB proceeds) will continue to be at the prevailing market exchange rate and the
ultimate user/buyer of foreign currency in India will not enjoy any exchange rate
protection under the Scheme.
sales of foreign currency by the Reserve Bank in the 
viii)
vii)
vi)
v)
iv)
iii)
ii)
variation on receipts under the RIB Scheme.
i)
of India Arrangement to Cover Exchange Risk for RIBs
Account : RBI-Government "Maintenance of Value" Impact of 'Maintenance of Value' (MOV) arrangements
on Money Supply and Government Budget
Technically, during the operation of the RIB-MOV Scheme, there will be an increase
in Reserve Bank's net credit to the Government to the extent of Reserve Bank's investments
in non-negotiable securities issued by the Government for the purpose of meeting its
contribution to the MOV account. There will, however, be no increase in currency in
circulation or the deposit base of the banking system on account of MOV arrangements. As
such, there will be no change in reserve money or money stock on this account. Similarly, the
effect on the Government Budget will be neutral as payment by the Government to the MOV
Technical Note
In the fortnightly statistics on Components and Sources of Reserve Money/Money
Stock(M3) released by the Reserve Bank, during the operation of the MOV arrangement, the
increase shown in net bank credit to the Government on account of purchase of Government
securities will be exactly offset by the equivalent increase in "Net non-Monetary Liabilities of
the Reserve Bank". (An increase in Net Non-Monetary Liabilities has a contractionary effect
on money supply). As such, on account of MOV arrangement, all other things remaining the
same, there will be no change in Reserve Money or M3.
Press Release : 1998-99/448
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
account will be exactly offset by receipts against the issue of Government securities.