` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
March 21, 1998 
High Banking Transaction Costs are a 'Deadweight Loss': RBI Governor 
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India addressed the participants of a 
Symposium on Transformation of Indian Banking and Financial System in 50 Years of 
India's Independence. The two-day Symposium was organised by the Bankers Training 
College of the Reserve Bank of India in Mumbai on March 20-21 to celebrate the 50th 
year of India's Independence. The Symposium was attended by senior officers from 
banks, financial institutions and the Reserve Bank of India.  
Addressing the participants, the Governor said that the achievements of the banking 
sector during the past 50 years are a matter of pride. No other country has achieved the 
depth and the spread that the Indian banking has over the past 50 years. Banks have 
also played a useful role in channelising and mobilising resources for the development of 
the Indian economy. More importantly, in terms of manpower and skills, India had a 
comparative advantage over its competitors, he pointed out.  
Outlining the challenges before the banking system as it entered the new millennium, the 
Governor stated that it was important to make available banking services to consumers 
at a reasonable cost. He pointed out that the transaction costs for banking services in 
India are very high and even have a bearing on the formulation of the monetary policy in 
that they reduce the maneuverability of the policy makers so far as interest rates are 
concerned. Explaining this he stated that transaction costs added to the real rate of 
interest give a very high nominal rate of interest and added that high rates of interests 
are not conducive for economic development. Further, since much of the transaction 
cost is a `deadweight loss', that is, it is not a transfer payment, high transaction cost 
benefits no one; whereas lower transaction costs give much leeway to monetary 
authorities, he argued. High rate of interest not only has an impact on customer service 
but also leads to the incidence of non performing assets. The Governor implored for an 
efficient and contemporary payment and settlement system for the Indian banking and 
financial system and said that such a system would also help the banks in giving better 
and speedier customer service.  
The Governor also stressed on development of financial markets, especially the debt 
markets and athe money markets. Mentioning that a lot has been done to develop these 
markets in the past, he added that they need to be further developed in terms of 
enhancing liquidity and ease of transactions in the debt markets. He argued that a well-
developed debt market is crucial at this juncture of Indian economy. The financing needs 
of sectors which need development today, such as, infrastructure, are different, he 
pointed out. He called upon the banks and financial institutions to contribute towards 
developing these areas in the coming years.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/872  