` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
March 24, 1998 
Development Research Group Study Series No.15 : EMU, EURO and India 
The Development Research Group (DRG) of the Reserve Bank of India has brought out 
its Study Series No.15 entitled "EMU, EURO and India". The study is authored jointly by 
Professor Ganti Subrahmanyam of the National Institute of Bank Management, Pune, 
Shri S.V.S. Dixit, Director and Shri Arindam Roy, Research Officer of the Department of 
Economic Analysis and Policy of the Reserve Bank of India.  
The study discusses a number of issues which have assumed significance in the 
international economy in view of the constitution of the European Monetary Union and 
the transition to a single currency in the Union starting from 1999. The issues highlighted 
in the study include the desirability of EMU, problems relating to the transition to a single 
currency EURO, the conduct of monetary policy by the European Central Bank (ECB), 
the costs and benefits of a single currency, the role of EURO in the international 
economy and the impact of EURO on the Indian economy.  
The study has discussed various stages of EMU and the convergence criteria that are 
required to be met by the member countries before joining the Union. The study notes 
that the transition to EURO would require decision by the participating countries in 
several areas viz., (i) the conversion rates to be fixed among the currencies of different 
countries before the EMU launch, (ii) the legal aspects of changeover to EURO and (iii) 
the decision regarding changeover to the markets to EURO by banks, financial sector, 
the general public and public administration. The study has suggested an important role 
for the European Central Bank in the maintenance of price stability and the management 
of foreign exchange reserves of the EU.  
Noting the presence of internal and external benefits of a single currency, the study 
spells out several static and dynamic efficiency gains of a single currency. These 
emanate from savings in transaction costs, elimination of exchange rate uncertainty, 
savings arising out of the exchange rate misalignments and the consequent 
misallocation of resources, positive effects on trade and investment and the consequent 
long-run positive response of productivity and efficiency gains due to the absence of 
exchange rate risks. The sum of these gains is estimated to be around 15 per cent of 
GDP. This apart, the EU will benefit from economies of scale, lower interest rates and a 
stable financial environment. The study also highlights the costs in moving to one 
money, including, the loss of earnings due to loss of spreads, floats, currency exchange 
and cross border payments (estimated around 9.5 - 14.4 bn.ECUs) and the costs of 
transition for banks and financial institutions in training, technological upgradation, 
marketing, etc. (estimated at ECU 8-10 billion). Looking at the trade invoicing pattern of 
major currencies, the study suggests a significant role of EURO in the international currency market next only to the US dollar. Moreover, the currency pattern of 
international bond, equity and derivative transactions suggest a crucial role of EURO as 
an investment currency while as a potential reserve currency it will have a second 
dominant position next only to the US dollar, given that the currency is strong and well 
managed. The study notes that while a single currency strengthens a single market, it 
implies loss of exchange rate as a policy instrument and seignorage revenue to the 
member countries and the loss of monetary policy as a notional policy instrument and 
the consequent reduced flexibility of fiscal policy.  
The study also includes a detailed analysis of the impact of EURO on the Indian 
economy. Analysing the Indo-EU trading behaviour, the study notes the presence of 
several commercial policy constraints in the trading relationship between India and the 
EU. These include, the higher average tariff rates, presence of Quantitative Restrictions 
(QRs) such as quotas, various technical barriers in the form of product standards, 
certification requirements etc. and frequent investigations of anti-dumping complaints 
from the EU on Indian exporters. The study estimates that the creation of EURO will lead 
to a small loss in forex dealing to Indian banks while the loss of employment to the 
Indian banking sector will be negligible. Other costs to Indian banks will be minimal and 
relate mostly to training of staff, upgradation of information technology, marketing and 
legal issues etc. This apart, since the forex reserve management strategy is based on 
the safety considerations of hedging currency risk rather than expected return 
maximisation, the US dollar will remain the dominant currency in the forex portfolio in the 
immediate future.  
The study observes that while official capital flows from EU to India is unlikely to improve 
due to the internal capital demands in EU countries for social programmes, the future of 
private capital inflows from EURO to India is promising in view of structural reforms 
which have significantly improved the investor-friendly environment in India. The Indian 
corporates will also benefit from increased access to the EU financial markets. However, 
the study highlights that there will be an increase in India's external debt if the US dollar 
depreciates at the time of EURO-unveiling while, a weak EURO will lead to decline of 
India's external debt in dollar term.  
The DRG undertakes quick and effective policy-oriented research backed by strong 
analytical and empirical basis on subjects of current interest. DRG studies are the 
outcome of collaborative efforts between experts from outside the Reserve Bank and the 
pool of research talents within the Bank. These studies are released for wider circulation 
with a view to generating constructive discussion among professional economists and 
policy makers. The views expressed in these studies are those of the authors and do not 
reflect the views of the Reserve Bank.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/881   
Cash Reserve Ratio 
Under Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, all scheduled commercial 
banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks) are, at present, required to maintain with the 
Reserve Bank of India, as cash reserve ratio (CRR) of 10.5 per cent of their net demand 
and time liabilities (excluding liabilities subject to zero CRR prescription). It has been 
decided to reduce the CRR. Accordingly, the CRR to be maintained by scheduled 
commercial banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks) is being reduced by 0.50 
percentage point from 10.5 per cent to 10.0 per cent in two phases of 0.25 percentage 
point each as set out below:  
 
Phasing of CRR Reduction for 
Scheduled Commercial Banks 
(excluding Regional Rural Banks) 
CRR on Net Demand and Time Effective Date (Fortnight 
Liabilities beginning from) 
10.25 March 28, 1998 
10.00 April 11, 1998 
 
As a result 0.50 percentage point reduction in CRR, the resources of banks would be 
augmented by about Rs. 2,600 crore (Rs. 1,300 crore for each phase of reduction).  
A notification is being issued to banks separately.  
 
2. Kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter to the Adviser-in-Charge, Monetary Policy 
Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Post Box No. 406, Mumbai - 400 
001.  
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
(Bimal Jalan) 
Governor 