Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India,
1997-98 (July-June)
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in
India, 1997-98 (July-June). The Report presents a comprehensive review of developments and
steps initiated to address the issues relating to banking sector in particular and financial sector in
performing assets (NPAs) and enhance their capital adequacy ratios. The spread of banks also
declined during 1997-98. As a result of lower provision required on investments and relatively
lower intermediation cost, banks were able to obtain relatively higher profits (gross and net)
Many banks including public sector banks have increased their non-traditional banking
prudential measures adopted in the last few years and due to meagre exposure to real estate
During 1997-98 the banking sector continued its reform process with reference to interest
rate deregulation and also in deepening Government securities market. Deposit growth of
scheduled commercial banks continued to be strong during 1997-98 and in the first half of 1998-
99. Although credit expansion remained subdued during the first half of 1997-98, it started
picking up in the second half and resulted in an impressive growth in the flow of credit to
public sector undertakings and private corporate sector showed accelerated growth as compared
with that in the previous year. With the result, the total flow of resources to the commercial
The Committee of Banking Sector Reforms under the Chairmanship of Mr. M.
of implementation of financial sector reforms and to suggest remedial measures for strengthening
the banking system. The Reserve Bank of India, in consultation with the Union Government,
announced some of the decisions in October 1998 as a part of mid-term review of the Monetary
Operating profits of scheduled commercial banks recorded an increase of 19.5 per cent.
Net interest income (spread of scheduled banks) (i.e. interest income  interest expenditure)
as a per cent of total assets showed a decrease of 27 basis points from 3.22 in 1996-97 to 2.95 in
1997-98. While net NPAs as a percentage of net advances declined from 9.2 per cent in 1996-97
to 8.2 per cent in 1997-98, net NPAs relative to total assets declined from 3.6 per cent to 3.3 per
cent in the same period. Out of 27 public sector banks, 26 banks attained the stipulated 8 per cent
capital adequacy requirement as compared with 25 banks last year.
minus
and Credit Policy for 1998-99. Implementation of decisions would strengthen the Indian banks.
Narasimham submitted its report in April 1998. The Committee was set up to review the progress
sector during 1997-98 was significantly larger than in the previous year.
commercial sector. Besides, banks’ investment in commercial paper, bonds, debentures, shares of
market, low short-term external debt and relatively transparent financial infrastructure.
but the financial system in India was relatively unaffected by South East Asian crisis due to several
activities. This is evident from the substantial increase in non-interest income. Not only the banks
during 1997-98.
of their operating and net profits in 1997-98. Besides banks were able to reduce their level of non-
The performance of scheduled commercial banks showed a distinct improvement in terms
Commercial banking
general in 1997-98 and subsequently up to September 30, 1998.
November 10, 19982
Risk management is emerging as an important area. Banks have to therefore undertake a
comprehensive Asset Liability Management (ALM) strategy. Detailed draft guidelines were
supervisory system in the course of financial liberalisation. The supervisory strategy in India at
present comprises both off-site surveillance and on-site inspections. The new approach to annual
financial inspections based on CAMELS - Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management,
Earnings, Liquidity and Systems - framework commenced from July 1997. A large number of
Basle Core Principles for effective banking supervision had also been adhered to, while the
Although the performance of cooperative banking institutions was somewhat subdued
during 1997-98, cooperative banks emulated the changing structure and practices of commercial
banking sector in revamping their internal systems and practices, ensuring in the process timely
completion of audit and upgradation of their financial architecture. The resource position of the
principal refinancing agency ., National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development was
Financial institutions
During 1997-98, sanctions and disbursements by all financial institutions increased, with
the increase being more pronounced in the case of sanctions. This trend was noticed in all major
In the context of the amendment to the Reserve Bank of India Act, the entire gamut of
regulation and supervision over the activities of non-banking financial companies (NBFCs)
underwent a directional change, both in terms of focus and thrust.  Accordingly the norms of
function on sound and healthy lines within the overall framework of the financial system while
2000 (Y2K) Problem. It has been increasingly recognised that Y2K issues have cross-border
implications. With a view to addressing these issues in a timely fashion, a high level working
group with members drawn from banking, regulatory, supervisory and information technology
departments of the Reserve Bank, with representation from Indian Banks’ Association,
commercial banks and the National Institute for Bank Management, has been constituted. This
Group is interacting with the banking sector and has been taking steps for attaining full
Press Release : 1998-99/609
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
compliance of the Year 2000 problem.
In India, as in any other country in the world, the financial system is confronted with Year
Year 2000 problem
ensuring that depositors’ interests are not jeopardized.
classification of NBFCs were revised and refined. The objective is to ensure that these companies
NBFCs
term lending institutions as well as investment institutions.
enhanced substantially.
viz
Cooperative banks
remaining ones are at different stages of implementation.
The experience of South East Asian crisis has reiterated the need for sound regulatory and
circulated with a view to ensuring that banks adopt ALM System from April 1, 1999.