` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
24 Apr, 1998 
 
Summary Recommendations of The Working Group set up by RBI 
for Harmonising the Role of DFIs and Banks 
 
• Significant changes suggested in role and operations of DFIs  
• Sweeping changes proposed with regard to State-level Institutions  
• Enabling changes proposed in regulatory/supervisory framework  
• Substantive content of harmonisation between DFIs and Banks spelt out  
The Summary Recommendations of the Report of the Working Group for Harmonising the Role and 
Operations of DFIs and Banks was submitted by Shri S.H. Khan, CMD, IDBI and Chairman of the Working 
Group to the Governor, RBI, at Mumbai today. RBI had constituted a seven-member Working Group on 
December 15, 1997, keeping in view the need for evolving an efficient and competitive financial system. The 
terms of reference of the Group were as follows:  
i. To review the Role, Structure and Operations of DFIs and Commercial Banks in the emerging 
operating environment and suggest changes;  
ii. To suggest measures for bringing about harmonisation in the lending and working capital finance by 
Banks and DFIs;  
iii. To examine whether DFIs could be given increased access to short-term funds and the regulatory 
framework needed for the purpose;  
iv. To suggest measures for strengthening of organisation, human resources, risk management 
practices and other related issues in DFIs and Commercial Banks in the wake of Capital Account 
Convertibility.  
v. To make such other recommendations as the Working Group may deem appropriate to the subject.  
Apart from Shri Khan, the Working Group comprised Shri M.S. Verma, Chairman, SBI, Shri K. V. Kamath, MD 
and CEO, ICICI, Shri K.D. Agrawal, CMD, IFCI, Shri M.G. Bhide, CMD, Bank of India, Shri A.T. Pannir 
Selvam, CMD, Union Bank of India and Shri V. Subrahmanyam, ED, RBI as members. IDBI provided the 
Secretariat for the Group.  
The Summary Recommendations attempt to provide a considered and structured response to the 
opportunities and challenges flowing from continuing internal liberalisation and greater international 
integration, both for the domestic financial system (including regulatory oversight) as well as for the 
participants who currently inhabit it. These have been drawn, in substantial measure, from the best available 
international policies, structures and covenants. Together, they have the potential to provide the blue-print for 
a robust, yet harmonious, growth of the domestic financial sector. The recommendations relate to the major 
financial intermediaries viz. Banks, All-India Development Financial Institutions and State-level Financial 
Institutions.  
The Summary Recommendations of the Group are enclosed in the Annexure. The Main Report of the 
Working Group is currently under preparation and is likely to be submitted shortly. 
To all representatives of the Press and Mass Media  Changes in Role, Structure and Operations 
1. A gradual elimination of extant boundaries between Commercial Banks and Development Financial 
Institutions (DFIs), both on the assets as well as on the liabilities side, is necessary if Indian financial 
institutions and commercial banks are to prepare themselves to compete in a deregulated and 
increasingly global marketplace. The Group therefore recommends a progressive move towards 
universal banking and the development of an enabling regulatory framework for the purpose.  
2. In particular, this implies that a full banking licence be eventually granted to DFIs. In the 
interim, DFIs may be permitted to have a banking subsidiary (with holdings upto 100%), while 
the DFIs themselves may continue to play their existing role.  
3. A universal bank can have any of these structures: a single company, a holding company with 
individually capitalised but wholly-owned subsidiaries, a group of entities with cross-holdings, or a 
flagship company with subsidiaries which may or may not have independent shareholders. The 
Group suggests that the appropriate corporate structure should be an internal 
management/shareholder decision and should not be imposed by the regulator.  
4. Size, expertise and reach are now deemed crucial to sustained viability and future survival in the 
financial sector. The Group therefore recommends that management and shareholders of 
Banks and DFIs should be permitted to explore and enter into gainful mergers. These mergers 
should be possible not only between Banks but also between Banks and DFIs and not only 
between strong and weak though viable entities but even between two (or more) strong Banks 
and DFIs. However, such restructuring/consolidation should be brought about in a market-oriented 
fashion and should be led by viability and profitability considerations alone. This would require the 
right legal and industrial relations environment to prevail so that optimum advantage can be derived 
from the proposed restructuring/consolidation through a process of rationalisation.  
5. DFIs in India are already moving in the direction of universal banking and are increasingly operating 
on commercial as opposed to developmental considerations. However, if the DFIs are required to 
assume any developmental obligations, the Group recommends that the RBI/Govt. should 
provide an appropriate level of financial support to enable them to fulfil these obligations.  
Changes in regulatory and legal framework 
6. The Group recommends that the overall objective of regulation should be to facilitate free competition 
across traditional boundaries and to contain the impact of failure on the financial system rather than 
to prevent failure.  
7. A function-specific regulatory framework must develop that targets activities and is 
institution-neutral with regard to the regulatory treatment of identical services rendered by 
any participant in the financial system. This concept of neutrality should be applicable to both 
foreign and local entities.  
8. No intermediary (such as a bank, financial institution, mutual fund or insurance company) should be 
relatively disadvantaged in performing an identical function vis-a-vis other intermediaries because of 
an unnecessarily high level of net regulatory burden being placed upon it. The latter must be 
determined solely by systemic efficiency and risk management concerns and, where 
necessary, the equalization of the net regulatory burden must be through a reduction of the 
burden on the over-regulated entity, not through an increase in burden on an adequately 
regulated entity. In particular, it must be kept in mind that any fresh regulatory burden that is 
imposed with a view to creating a level playing field must fulfill certain systemic and supervisory 
objectives and should not be driven merely by the need to equalize regulatory disadvantage.  
9. In view of the increasing overlap in functions being performed by various participants in the financial 
system, the Group feels that a measure of co-ordination among regulators is desirable. The Group 
therefore recommends the establishment of a 'super-regulator' to supervise and co-ordinate 
the activities of these multiple regulators in order to ensure uniformity in regulatory treatment.   
10. The Group's view is that, at a fundamental level, legal reform is called for in cases of enforcement of 
contractual obligations and dissolution of companies. In particular, a speedy implementation of 
legal reforms in the debt recovery area of Banks and Financial Institutions should be given top 
priority. Whilst several attempts have been made in the past to address this issue, it has fallen short 
of expectations for diverse reasons including the magnitude of cases pending in the various judicial 
fora. The Group recommends a thorough revamp of the 1993 Act on Recovery of Debts from 
Banks and DFIs on the suggested lines in this regard.  
11. In addition, there is a need to redraft other codified laws impacting operations of DFIs/Banks, enacted 
earlier, on the grounds of redundancy and/or incompatibility. This is essential to ensure that the legal 
environment moves in tandem with the emerging needs of the financial sector.  
12. For effective computerisation of branches, the Group recommends that amendments to the Banking 
Companies (period of Preservation of Records) Rules, 1985 and other suitable enactments on the 
lines of Electronic Fund Transfer Act in USA be examined for implementation.  
Changes in supervisory practices 
13. The Supervisory Authority should undertake primarily off-site supervision based on periodic 
reporting by the Banks or DFIs as the case may be. On-site supervision should be undertaken 
only in exceptional cases, mainly to oversee the quality of self-regulation by financial sector 
participants. The assistance of statutory auditors may be taken by the Supervisory Authority to get 
special reports on selected areas of supervision every year. The emphasis of the supervisory system 
should be more on macro-management and health of the institution rather than on micro-level 
regulation at the individual transaction/account level.  
14. Another essential element of the improved supervisory framework should be the ability of the 
supervisors to supervise the DFIs/Banks on a consolidated basis. This is one of the 
recommendations of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, released in September 1997. 
Future accounting standards must consequently include rules on consolidated supervision for 
financial subsidiaries and conglomerates. Further, as domestic financial entities assume an 
international character, banking supervisors should adopt global consolidated supervision 
(instead of mere national regulation) adequately monitoring and applying appropriate prudential 
norms to all aspects of business conducted by banking organisations world-wide, primarily at their 
foreign branches and subsidiaries. A key component of such global consolidated supervision is 
establishment of contact and exchange of supervisory and financial information with other supervisors 
involved, primarily country supervisory authorities.  
15. For meaningful consolidated supervision- both domestic and global- the Group recommends the 
development of a "risk-based supervisory framework" along the lines of the Report of the 
Task Force on Conglomerate Supervision, published by the Institute of International Finance, 
in February 1997. The Report addresses growing concerns among international financial regulators 
in the banking, insurance and securities markets that financial market globalisation and conglomerate 
corporate structure may increase systemic risk. It suggests that, for effective adaptation to global 
market trends, the international supervisory framework applicable to globally-active financial 
institutions may be revised in a manner more consistent with firms' risk profiles rather than their 
corporate structures.  
Statutory Obligations 
16. Any concerted move towards full-service universal banking, in the Group's view, would have to be 
prefaced by a thorough examination and review of extant obligations. In particular, the provisions 
relating to - (a) the Cash Reserve Ratio, (b) the Statutory Liquidity Ratio requirement, (c) obligations 
relating to priority sector lending and other pre-emptions of resources (e.g. food advances) and (d) 
Rural Branches - even for existing entities - would need to be reviewed. Its analysis leads the 
Group to recommend that:  
17. Given its twin importance as a standby liquidity support against premature withdrawals from a 
bank and also as an instrument of monetary policy, the application of CRR should be confined 
to cash and cash-like instruments. Further, despite serial reduction in the initial phase of reforms, 
CRR in India is still very high by international standards. Besides, there will be intense pressure on 
margins with increased competition, both domestic and global. CRR should therefore be brought 
down progressively within a time-bound frame to international levels.  18. With the establishment of stringent asset classification and provisioning norms and the issuance of 
Government of India securities at market determined rates, the need for an SLR has declined 
considerably. It may, therefore, be useful to consider phasing it out in line with international 
practice.  
19. The objective of placing a statutory minimum on the proportion of the advances to be given to certain 
sectors is to ensure that some of the sectors have access to funds at concessional rates and they do 
not suffer from a paucity of funds. Rather than impose this obligation on the entire banking 
system, the Group's view is that there is a need for an alternate mechanism to be developed 
for financing these sectors. Such a mechanism will aim to balance the need for funds with the 
need to bring better suited structures and specialised skills to bear in dealing with the 
sectors. Whenever a need arises for concessional funding for certain sectors, the same can 
be provided by specifically targeted subsidies to that sector.  
20. Since, in the interim, the existing obligation with respect to priority sector lending is expected 
to continue, the Group recommends that the following modifications may be made in its 
definition: (a) given the critical role of infrastructure in any future development of the Indian economy 
(in view of the serious bottlenecks that exist in the current infrastructure which hamper both the 
growth and competitiveness of Indian exports), the Group feels that infrastructure should be accorded 
the highest priority in financing. Therefore, if the concept of priority sector lending is to continue in its 
present form, it becomes necessary to modify its definition to reflect the growing importance of 
infrastructure finance. One clear alternative is to include infrastructure lending in the definition of 
priority sector. However, there is a concern that this may crowd out investment in other priority 
sectors and may relatively disadvantage those in the system who are not lending to the infrastructure 
sectors. It may therefore be preferable not to include infrastructure lending in the definition of 
"net bank credit" used in computing the priority sector obligations. This is absolutely imperative 
considering the large volumes involved in infrastructure financing (once it takes off) which would push 
up the overall credit quantum on which the priority sector lending is based, unnecessarily enlarging 
the latter obligation; (b) under the present stipulation, the priority sector obligation is linked to 40% of 
the net bank credit of the current financial year which hampers the process of credit planning. To 
facilitate efficient loan disbursals, the priority sector obligation should be linked to the net 
bank credit at the end of the previous financial year; (c) at present, the classification of advances 
to priority sectors is determined mainly with reference to size. The Group is of the view that the 
definition of priority sector may be widened to enable the inclusion of a whole industry / class 
of activities. This would ensure that a sector which has been identified as priority is accorded due 
importance without imposing an additional restriction on account of the size of individual beneficiaries.  
Re-Organisation of State-level Institutions (SLIS) 
21. The Group recommends that the agenda for reform with regard to SLIs should incorporate the 
following:  
i. Eventual merger of SFCs, SIDCs and SSIDCs in each state into a single entity. While the 
consolidation of SLIs should form part of the short-term agenda of reforms in the 
financial sector, an immediate-term imperative is the corporatisation of these entities 
to improve their competitive efficiency;  
ii. Following restructuring/re-organisation, strong SFCs could be encouraged to go 
public by making IPOs. In the process, the State Government's holding in these 
Corporations may be allowed to be brought down to below 50%;  
iii. Since the credit requirements of small scale industries are being taken care of by Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) since its establishment in 1990, it would be 
desirable to transfer the present shareholding of IDBI in these SLIs to SIDBI. It should 
be vested with the overall responsibility for enacting policy and procedural guidelines with 
regard to the operations of SFCs;  
iv. SIDBI should be accorded the same role and status as the nodal / co-ordinating agency for 
financing of small (and medium) industries as is now available to NABARD in the field of 
agricultural development. Ownership in SIDBI should, as a logical corollary, stand 
transferred to RBI /Govt. on the same lines as NABARD;  
v. SIDBI's role in the state-level institutions should be both as stake-holder as well as resource 
provider. For this purpose, SIDBI should have access to assured sources of 
concessional funding from RBI;  
vi. SLIs should be brought under the supervisory ambit of RBI ;  vii. With a view to fostering professionalism and efficiency, the CEO of the SLIs should ideally be 
a professional/ technocrat, appointed by the Board and shareholders (for a fixed term) to 
whom he should be accountable. The CEO should be able to draw expert advice from an 
autonomous and professional Board of Directors, elected by shareholders. As an enabling 
measure, there should be suitable guidelines for representation on these Boards.  
Harmonising the role, Operations and Regulatory Framework of DFIs and Banks 
22. The profile of asset creation of Banks and DFIs should be motivated by prudential requirements and 
asset-liability management considerations as well as the need for diversification of business risk 
through a wide range of products and services. Having regard to the need for large amount of 
funding required, the Group feels that both Banks and DFIs (and/or their subsidiaries) could 
play a role in working capital finance and long-term funding with different levels of emphasis 
on each segment. As a number of intermediate steps are needed before the universal banking 
model becomes a reality, the entire aspect of harmonising the roles of DFIs and Banks is being 
revisited on the premise that the basic functional differences would continue, at least for the present. 
Consequently, the recommendations that follow (Numbers: 24- 30) are of an interim nature 
and must be viewed as such.  
23. The considerable amount of overlap between the current business of Banks and DFIs 
necessitates close co-ordination and harmonisation of their lending policies. The objective of 
harmonisation is not to impede competition but to ensure that appropriate quantum of credit is made 
available to industry at a reasonable cost, there is proper supervision of accounts and a mechanism 
is built up to detect incipient sickness and take prompt remedial measures in concert for better overall 
credit administration.  
24. In order to achieve close coordination and harmonisation between DFIs and Banks on various issues 
of mutual interest, the Group recommends that a Standing (Co-ordination) Committee be set up 
on which Banks and DFIs would be represented.  
25. Various restrictions have been imposed on DFI borrowings in terms of choice of instruments, maturity 
and interest rate, ceiling on short term funding and also on their foreign currency operations. These 
disadvantages have introduced significant financial repression and have eventually contributed 
towards increased cost of long-term finance for clients. More recently, RBI has stipulated that bond 
issues by DFIs with either a maturity of less than 5 years or maturity of 5 years and above but with 
interest rate exceeding 200 basis points over the yield on Government of India securities of equal 
residual maturity would require its prior approval. The Group feels that such restrictions run counter to 
the spirit of financial sector liberalisation and should therefore be withdrawn. Further, the Group 
recommends that the extant overall ceiling for DFIs' mobilisation of resources by way of term 
money bonds (having maturities of 3 - 6 months), Certificates of Deposits (maturities of 1-3 
years), Term Deposits (fixed deposits from the public with maturity of 1-5 years) and inter-
corporate deposits at 100% of net owned funds (NOF) of DFIs may be removed. The maturity 
ceiling of five years on deposits from the public, the capping of interest rate on deposits of DFIs at 
interest rates offered by SBI for similar maturities and the restriction relating to minimum size of 
deposits that may be accepted by DFIs may also be removed. The current restriction with regard to 
premature withdrawal not being permitted for two years may be reduced to one year. With the 
introduction of the above relaxations and having regard to the minimum maturity of one year 
for fixed deposits from the public, the Group recommends that a suitable level of SLR may be 
stipulated for DFIs on incremental outstanding fixed deposits raised from the public 
(excluding inter-bank deposits).  
26. The Group recommends that CRR should not be applicable to DFIs under the present 
structure where they are not permitted to access cash and cash-like instruments.  
27. The Group felt that there is an urgent need to activate the Term Money market which would, in 
turn, assist in the rapid development of the rupee derivative market. In this context, inter-bank 
/ DFI investments and deposits should be free from reserve requirements.  
28. In line with inter-bank deposits, a uniform risk weightage of 20% may be assigned for 
investment made by commercial banks in bonds of "AAA" rated DFIs.  
29. The Group recommends that the Banks be permitted to exclude investments in SLR securities 
issued by a DFI while calculating the exposure to that DFI.  
30. The Group feels that certain restrictions placed on DFIs' foreign currency operations would need to be 
removed. At present, DFIs operate in the forex markets under a restricted Authorised Dealer's licence 
which allows them to undertake specific types of foreign exchange transactions incidental to their main business. The Group recommends that the DFIs should be granted full Authorised 
Dealer's licence. This would help DFIs to manage their FC funds efficiently, offer better rates to 
clients and add liquidity and depth to foreign exchange markets.  
Organisation Redesign 
31. A considered response to continuing liberalisation and greater external openness under CAC and 
WTO framework for an essentially service-driven financial sector implies going beyond mere 
paradigm shifts in the prospective role and operations of Banks and DFIs. They necessitate a 
complete transformation in the way these intermediaries do business, particularly in terms of their 
Organisation and Management Information Systems, Risk-management Practices and Human 
Resources Development. The Group was therefore asked to suggest suitable measures for 
strengthening these aspects. The substantive content of reforms in these areas would, of course, 
vary, depending on the specific requirements of each institution. The Group's recommendations 
which follow are therefore largely indicative in nature.  
32. Best practices in the area of corporate governance such as imparting full operational 
autonomy and flexibility to managements and Boards of Banks and DFIs should be 
implemented.  
33. On organisational restructuring, the Group recommends that Banks/ DFIs should principally 
target the following : a complete redesign of the business system, with the Top Management 
spelling out the strategic objectives for principal stakeholders (clients, employees, shareholders etc.). 
The corporate culture must undergo an attitudinal change in favour of a pro-active relationship-
based approach, with Relationship Managers serving as the single contact point. A consensus-
driven committee-based approach is recommended for loan sanctions to get the benefit of 
pluralistic views and at the same time eliminate individual biases. Finally, decisions on organisation 
structure should be allowed to be based purely on commercial judgement.  
Risk Management 
34. The increased menu of risks in the progressively deregulated and globalised scenario would require 
Banks/DFIs to assign primacy to risk management in its strategic initiatives. In this connection, the 
Working Group recommends a clear emphasis on the following as part of a prudent risk-return 
optimisation strategy :  
i. There should be a clear strategy approved by the Board of Directors as to their risk 
management policies and procedures. The Senior Management should ensure that the 
structure of Banks/DFIs' business and the level of risk it assumes are effectively managed 
with a well-defined system and based on a clear definition of individuals/committees 
responsible for managing such risks.  
ii. An Integrated Treasury and a proactive Asset-Liability Management (ALM) , which 
considers both on- and off-balance sheet items, would be central to future prosperity of 
financial sector participants under the changed scenario.  
iii. Robust (internal) operational controls as well as strong firm-wide support functions - 
including audit - must be in place to ensure that risk management policies are being 
supported, controls are in effect and that complex areas are being appropriately dealt with.  Information Technology and MIS 
35. An upgraded Information Technology (IT) and a vastly improved and efficient Management 
Information System (MIS) are both mandatory to support the new organisational structures and 
redesigned processes. The Group is of the view that the following would facilitate the 
establishment of IT systems and MIS of international standards :  
i. Existing laws may not be adequate or have the clarity to deal with some of the key issues that 
are likely to emerge following introduction of computerisation and technologically advanced 
communications in banking. There is compelling logic to revisit the legal framework in 
this area and render it compatible with the requirements of a technology-driven 
banking environment.  
ii. DFIs/Banks should urgently establish, create employee/customer awareness and 
familiarity with e-mail, Internet and Intranet Banking, Smart Cards and Electronic Data 
Interchange (EDI) in a strategically sequenced fashion.  
36. The Group considers that it would be worthwhile going into the details of the requirements 
and drawing up a perspective plan / blue-print for a robust automation in the financial sector.  
37. In particular, the Group is of the view that financial sector participants would need to implement 
computerised decision-support systems.  
Human Resources Development 
38. The Group feels that the success of any organisational change in a service-oriented industry like 
financial services will depend on the initiatives taken in the area of Human Resources Development. 
The Group therefore recommends that the reformed HRD agenda of DFIs/Banks should 
encompass the following :  
i. Prescient management and leadership, with accent on teamwork.  
ii. Broad-based recruitments, both at entry level from campus as well as lateral entry of 
professionals at higher levels to fill skill gaps, particularly in the areas of:  
• Economic Research & Industry Analysis  
• Risk Management  
• Treasury and Financial Derivatives  
• Investment Banking  
• Human Resources Management  
• Information Technology  
• Relationship Management  
iii. Systematic training programs (including exchange programmes), with focus on practical 
skills, and expertise linked to career development as well as real-time familiarisation of staff 
with the latest developments  
iv. Skill-building and skill-upgradation, including moving staff across functions selectively to 
develop Top Management talent  
v. Market-related compensation packages, with financial rewards for strong performance and 
superior skills  
vi. Viable and enforceable exit option for employees who are unable to cope with the radical 
cultural and technological change. An enabling legal framework thus needs to emerge fairly 
early in the organised labour market area.  
vii. In order to facilitate pro-active decision-making and make vigilance function more meaningful, 
a Special Vigilance machinery exclusively for the financial sector on the lines of Serious 
Fraud Office (SFO) of the U.K. may be set up.  