` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
July 21, 1998 
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers - June 1998 Issue 
The June 1998 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers (OPs) contains two 
research articles and five book reviews. They reflect the research efforts of the authors and their 
personal views.  
The first article of the volume "identification of Monetary Policy Shock and Its Effects on Output 
and Price : A Structural VAR Approach" by A.K.Srimany and G.P.Samanta analyses the 
dynamic impact of monetary policy shocks on output and prices in India. The central problem in 
establishing the facts about the effects of monetary policy shocks on the economy is to 
distinguish the policymakers' reaction to the state of economy or the feedback rule from the 
exogenous component of monetary policy action. Thus, monetary policy actions are the sum of 
two components : feedback component and exogenous policy shocks. It is important to 
distinguish between these two components for isolating the effects of pure monetary policy 
shocks. With the help of monthly data on money supply, output and prices, the study constructs 
a structural vector autoregression model to explain the impacts of monetary policy shocks in 
India.  
The results of the study indicate that the effect of monetary shock on changes in output is about 
8.3 per cent during the first four months of the shock, but it increases to 17 per cent by the 24th 
month. On the other hand, monetary shocks contribute around 31.6 per cent of the price 
changes in the first two months which increases to 34 per cent in the long-run. Using the 
impulse response function analysis the study shows that the effect of money on output is found 
to be insignificant in the short run, and becomes significant in the medium time frame of about 8 
months but recedes gradually in the subsequent period. In the case of price, the effect of 
monetary shock is highly positive up to the fourth month and remains significant upto 8 months. 
Subsequently, the impact declines to near zero in an oscillating path. The study also attempts to 
statistically identify the monetary policy stance into "tight", "neutral" and "easy" policy.  
The other article in this issue by Himanshu Joshi and Mridul Saggar on "Excess Returns, Risk 
Premia and Efficiency of the Foreign Exchange Market : Indian Experience in the Post-
Liberalisation Period" tests the market efficiency hypothesis for Indian foreign exchange market 
by estimating spot and forward Indian rupee-US dollar exchange rate regressions. Empirical 
evidence presented in the paper suggests that (i) the Indian foreign exchange market is not 
efficient, (ii) forward premiums are persistent and (iii) the variation in expected depreciation is 
larger than implied excess return which points towards the importance of fundamentals in the 
determination of exchange rate. From the policy point of view, the results underscore the 
importance of intervention in different market segments as needed and the emphasis on 
continuous monitoring of the critical fundamentals of the economy to ensure their reflection on 
the exchange rate.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1998-99/90 