December 22, 1998
"Hindi is the most suitable medium for providing banking facilities to the general public. Use of
Hindi in banks will not only extend banking facilities to general public but will also help flourish
the banking industry". This call was given by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India
He was speaking at the Rajbhasha Shield function which was held in the Reserve Bank of India
today to honour those public sector banks and financial institutions which had excelled in
performing their functions in Hindi during 1996-97. In the function held under the Chairmanship
of Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India results of house journal
competition were also announced and the prizes distributed. Referring to the difficult Hindi used
in banking in his address as the Chairman of the function, Dr. Reddy stated that Hindi is still
used as translation language in banks. This makes it difficult to grasp. He further stated that if we
use Hindi originally in banking correspondence, the language will definitely be found easy and
natural. The power of expression in a language will unfold with its increase application. He
Earlier, while welcoming the Governor, Deputy Governor and representatives of public sector
banks and financial institutions, Shri B. S. Sharma, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India ,
stated that currently English is the language of banking for some historical reasons. It is now the
demand of the nation that for socio, cultural and political reasons the language of banking should
be Hindi. He further stated that since the general public understands Hindi well, banking
Shri Sudhakar Didolkar, Principal Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India proposed a
vote of thanks to the Governor, Deputy Governor and the representatives of public sector banks
and financial institutions. Dr. Shrinivas Dwivedi, Officer-in-Charge (General Manager) of
Alpana Killwala
Release : 1998-99/824
  Press 
General Manager
A list of winner banks and financial institutions is enclosed.
of  Reserve Bank of  India conducted the programme. Rajbhasha Department 
business should be transacted in this language.
emphasised that Hindi should be the language of original thinking in banking.
while addressing representatives of the public sector banks and financial institutions.
1996-97 - Prize Distribution
Reserve Bank of India Rajbhasha ShieldRajbhasha Shield Competition 1996-97
First
Baroda
First
Maharashtra
First
Baroda
Fourth Vijaya Bank
Fourth Union Bank of India
Fourth Canara Bank
Third Central Bank of India
Second Bank of 
Bank of India
Rank Region “C”
Fourth Central Bank of India
Fourth Union Bank of India
Fourth Allahabad Bank
Third Bank of 
Second Bank of India
Punjab National Bank
Rank Region “B”
Fourth Bank of India
Fourth Oriental Bank of Commerce
Fourth Union Bank of India
Third Bank of 
Second Allahabad Bank
Punjab National Bank
Rank
Region “A”
Results of Reserve Bank Results of Reserve Bank House Journal Competition-1996-97
Bikaner & Jaipur First
Maharashtra
Manager
Fourth The Industrial Finance Corporation of India Ltd.
Fourth Punjab National Bank
Fourth Bank of 
Third Indore State Bank of 
Second Central Bank of India
State Bank of 
Rank Name of the Bank/Financial Institution