` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Jun 11,1998 
 
Statement by the Reserve Bank of India on  recent developments in the Foreign Exchange markets. 
 
An Assessment of the Present Position 
1. The Reserve Bank of India has been closely monitoring developments in the foreign exchange markets. While market 
conditions have been generally orderly, there has been more than normal activity in the market in the recent period. 
Turnover data in respect of inter-bank transactions reveal that while sales have been as per normal trends, purchases by 
banks have increased substantially in the past few days in order to meet requirements of their customers.  
2. An assessment made by the Reserve Bank of recent developments indicates that intensification of activity on purchase 
side has been a result of several factors. These include the recent uncertainty in the international exchange markets 
particularly the sharp depreciation of yen in the previous week; the expectation that the contagion affecting East-Asian 
crisis which had shown some signs of abatement in the previous months may in fact be intensified, uncertainty regarding 
immediate outlook for economic growth in India; and the possibility that spill-over effects of the international currency 
developments may further affect India's external position.  
3. While it is not possible for any country to remain completely unaffected by developments in the international exchange 
markets, particularly of developments in important trading countries like East-Asia and Japan, so far as India is concerned, 
the spill-over effects have been kept to minimum through constant monitoring and timely action to prevent the emergence 
of self-fulfilling speculative activities in the foreign exchange markets. In future also, the RBI is fully confident of ensuring 
that any spill-over effects of adverse development abroad are kept to the minimum through a carefully calculated policy 
responses to the emerging situation.  
4. So far as India's macro economic conditions are concerned, it is useful to recall that in the last three years, on an 
average, India has maintained a GDP growth rate of 6.6 per cent, inflation rate of about 5.7 per cent, which is one of the 
lowest in the developing world, and a sustainable current account deficit of 1.4 per cent. During this period, external debt to 
GDP has also been reduced from 32.3 per cent in March 1995 to 23.8 per cent in September 1997. The debt service ratio 
has also been reduced from 26.2 per cent in 1994-95 to an estimated 18.3 per cent in 1997-98. So far as prospects of 
growth in 1998-99 are concerned, the expected normal behaviour of monsoon augurs well for a substantial increase in 
agricultural production. In respect of industrial production also, there is a clear possibility of a sharp increase in output if, as 
expected, several large infrastructure projects are able to get off the ground. An interesting calculation shows that if the rate 
of growth of domestic capital goods industry in 1997-98 were of the same order as in 1995-96 or 1996-97, the industrial 
rate of growth in 1997-98 would have been as high as 9.2 per cent. With a boost in infrastructure and other investments in 
1998-99, this order of growth is not beyond reach.  
5. India's export performance in 1997-98 was less than satisfactory. In 1998-99, all efforts have to be made to achieve 
export growth of 20 per cent in dollar terms as announced by the Government and as endorsed by the exporting 
community. In order to help in these efforts, as a special and temporary measure, the Reserve Bank is announcing a sharp 
reduction in interest rates applicable to "incremental exports". Details are given below.  
6. India's foreign exchange reserves, as on 1st June 1998, were US$ 28.8 billion . Of this US$ 25.5 billion was in the form 
of foreign currency assets excluding gold and SDRs. At this level, India's foreign exchange reserve are equivalent to seven 
months of imports, 25 months of debt service payments, and nearly six months of import and debt service payments taken 
together. The level of reserves also substantially exceeds the total stock of short term debt and portfolio flows. In the past 
four years alone, India has added US$ 10.1 billion to its foreign exchange reserves. In 1997-98, which was a difficult year 
internationally because of financial crisis in East Asia, India has added US$ 2.9 billion to its reserves, most of it in the last 
quarter of the financial year.  7. The Reserve Bank will not hesitate to use its reserves, as needed to meet the country's external obligations and its 
current account deficit, if at all needed. This is exactly why the policy of keeping reserves at a high level has been followed 
by Government and the Reserve Bank. As per present assessment, however, current account deficit is expected to be in 
the range of 1.5 to 2.0 per cent, and capital flows are likely to be sufficient to meet this deficit.  
8. The day-to-day exchange movements in the exchange rates are "market determined", and will continue to remain so. As 
repeatedly stressed by the Reserve Bank of India, RBI does not have a specific target for a exchange rate. However, RBI is 
committed to maintain orderly and reasonable conditions in the market by providing additional supply of foreign exchange 
as considered necessary from time to time.  
9. Recently there have been reports about the foreign financial institutions (FIIs) withdrawing some of their investments 
from emerging markets, including India. While Reserve Bank of India continues to strongly welcome FIIs investments for 
faster development of capital markets in India, an increase or decrease in such flows from time-to-time is a normal aspect 
of market activity. FIIs, which wish to reduce their exposure in India, either because of their corporate strategic reasons or 
because of their market perceptions, are welcome to do so. As mentioned before, the large increases that have taken place 
in recent years in reserves are more than sufficient to meet any reduction in FIIs flows. As mentioned below, the Reserve 
Bank would be open to any requests from authorised dealers to meet the FIIs remittance requirements at market related 
rates.  
10. There has been some technical discussion about the rate of the rupee in relation to the Real Effective Exchange Rate 
(REER). The Reserve Bank does not consider REER to be an effective tool for management of short-term movements in 
the exchange rates which are subject to various influences including surplus capital flows from time-to-time. This is also the 
case in other countries. For example, in the recent period, Yen has been weakening in relation to other currencies even 
though the rate of inflation is lower than most of industrialised countries. The value of REER also raises several 
methodological issues, e.g. the choice of basket of currencies, the choice of the base period, the choice of trade weights 
and the choice of the price index etc. However, as there has been considerable discussions about the "right" level of the 
rupee in relation to REER, the figures of the imputed value of the rate on the basis of REER (with three different base-year 
levels, five currency trade weights and movements in the wholesale price index) are given below for illustrative purposes. It 
is however, reiterated that the Reserve Bank does not use short-term movements in REER as indicator of appropriateness 
or otherwise of exchange rate movements.  
Present value of rupee : Rs.42.30 per US Dollar 
Imputed value of rupee per US Dollar based on REER 
Base Year, 1990-91 : Rs.29.61 per US Dollar 
Base Year, 1993-94 : Rs.41.96 per US Dollar 
Base Year, 1996-97 : Rs.40.66 per US Dollar 
11. Considering the present state of the international markets and the developments in India, the Reserve Bank will advise 
banks and other participants to realistically assess various factors and avoid unwarranted speculative activity.  
New Measures and RBI's Advisory to Market Participants  
 
Exports :  
The present exchange rate of the rupee should help boost the export effort. In order to provide further support to exporters, 
as a special case and for a temporary period, the rupee interest rate charged by the banks to exporters on "incremental 
exports" over and above the base-year level of exports in 1997-98, will be only 6.5 per cent for pre-shipment credit for a 
period of six months and for post-shipment credit for a period of 90 days. (i.e. a maximum period of nine months). This rate 
is comparable to competitive rates, including 6 months U.S. dollar Libor rate, available internationally. This facility will be 
available for "incremental exports" upto 31st December 1999. This is a temporary facility and will not be renewed thereafter.  
 
The provision of credit under the scheme will be refinanced by the Reserve Bank at 4 per cent per annum. Incidentally, this 
rate is the same as payable by the Reserve Bank on CRR balances.  
 
Exporters are advised to take full advantage of the new scheme, which is a one-time measure. They are also advised not to 
delay realisation of their export bills. RBI will closely monitor "overdue" export receipts and will be prepared to take such 
action as may be necessary to ensure timely realisation of export receipts.   
Exporters are also provided credit in foreign currency by banks at rates linked to LIBOR and under current instructions they 
are required to charge exporters a spread of not more than 2/2.5 per cent over LIBOR. In order to enable exporters to 
access export credit in foreign currency more effectively at internationally competitive rates, banks would henceforth charge 
a spread of not more than 1.5 per cent over LIBOR. This facility will be available for entire volume of exports (and not 
limited to incremental exports). Banks have also been advised to review their internal procedures immediately so as to 
enable exporters to have access to such credit without any procedural hassles and delays.  
 
Imports  
All genuine demands of foreign exchange for imports which are consistent with the Exim-Policy announced by the 
Government of India, will be fully met. However, importers as well as banks are advised to monitor their credit utilisation for 
this purpose and ensure that bank credit is not utilised for anticipated import requirements beyond a reasonable period and 
undue build up of inventory/stocks is avoided. Advance payments, if any, must be as per normal trade practice. Authorised 
dealers are also expected to ensure that foreign exchange cover for imports are to meet need based inventory.  
 
Open position of Authorised Dealers  
RBI would continue with the current guidelines in place for open positions. However, a few instances of maintaining 
sustained long position not related to normal requirements have been noticed. Banks are advised to limit their positions to 
genuine requirements. RBI would monitor the position closely.  
 
Nostro balances  
Reserve Bank had permitted banks, on specific applications to undertake swaps and invest nostro balances in excess of 
15% of Tier I capital, subject to the overall gap discipline prescribed by RBI. ADs are advised not to arbitrage between the 
money and foreign exchange markets which could add additional volatility in the markets.  
 
Buy back of Indian paper  
Requests of Financial Institutions for buying back their own papers or other Indian papers in the international markets will 
be considered favourably. FIs can approach RBI for approval of their proposals in this regard.  
 
Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs)  
As per usual market practice, FIIs will take their own decisions in regard to reducing or increasing their stake in India's 
equity markets. While RBI would welcome an increase in these flows, it would also like to ensure that those FIIs which wish 
to reduce their investments, can do so easily at prevailing market rates. Banks/Authorised Dealers, acting on behalf of 
these FIIs may approach RBI in order to buy foreign exchange directly from the RBI at the prevailing market rate. 
Depending on market conditions, in line with its policy to reduce volatility, RBI would either sell the foreign exchange directly 
or advise the concerned bank to buy it in the market.  
 
For existing investments of FIIs in equity, the facility of forward exchange cover has not been made available. With effect 
from 12th June 1998, forward exchange cover facility for equity investment by FIIs will be available for `incremental 
investments' (over and above the level of investment in equity prevailing at the end of business on 11th June 1998).  
 
As a further facility, as already announced in the April credit policy, FIIs can henceforth invest in Treasury Bills if they wish 
to do so. This facility should particularly help those FIIs which are selling their equity investment in India with a view to 
reinvest their proceeds later.  
 
Liquidity Conditions and Domestic Interest Rates  
During the credit policy announcement on 29th April 1998, it was pointed out that liquidity conditions were comfortable. On 
April 27, 1998, the total amount placed by banks in the three-day Repo facility was Rs.8,529 crore. Since April 27, 1998, 
banks have continued to enjoy easy liquidity and total amount of Repos placed with the RBI were Rs.13,698 crore on June 
5, and Rs. 12,143 crore on June 6. The outstanding Repos on June 11, 1998 are Rs.5,987 crore. Thus, liquidity conditions 
continue to be easy. As announced earlier, RBI would be prepared to reduce CRR in case credit demand picks up and 
there is insufficent liquidity in the system.  
 
There has also been some speculation about the impact on Government borrowing programme on the outlook for future 
interest rates. While no firm view can be taken at this stage, the Reserve Bank would like to make it clear that it will phase 
out Government borrowing programme in a manner so that it has least adverse effects on long term interest rates. In order 
to do so, RBI will be prepared to accept private placement of securities from time-to-time and then release them to the 
market gradually.   
It will be appreciated that successful implementation of present intention in regard to liquidity and possibility of CRR 
reduction is feasible only if orderly conditions continue to prevail in the foreign exchange market. If there is an emergence of 
unwarranted speculation and excessive volatility, there will be no other option but to resort to liquidity tightening measures. 
This is a possibility that RBI would like to avoid as long as possible.  
 
Press Release : 1997-98/1197  
 