` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Feb 4, 1998 
 
Indian companies seeking Foreign Direct Investments - Further 
simplification of procedures by RBI 
 In a major drive to simplify procedures for foreign direct investment in India under the 
"automatic route", the Reserve Bank of India had last month dispensed with the need for 
its prior approval for such proposals. Indian companies/entrepreneurs have been given 
general permission for this purpose vide Notification No.FERA.180/98-RB dated January 
13, 1998.  
In terms of the foreign direct investment policy of the Government of India, proposals 
which do not satisfy the parameters prescribed for automatic approval by the Reserve 
Bank, require specific clearance from the Government of India {Secretariat for Industrial 
Approvals (SIA)/Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) as the case may be}.  
According to the present procedure in vogue, on receipt of the FIPB approval the 
concerned Indian companies approach the Regional Office (RO) of the Reserve Bank for 
"in-principle" approval for receiving remittances from abroad subject to the conditions 
prescribed by the FIPB. After the "in-principle" approval Indian companies can receive 
funds from abroad but they have to again approach the concerned Regional Office of the 
Reserve Bank with documentary evidence of foreign inward remittance for "final" 
approval under Sections 19(1) and 29(1) of FERA to issue shares to the foreign 
collaborator.  
In order to simplify the procedure in respect of cases already approved by the 
Government of India, the Reserve Bank has now decided to grant general permission 
under FERA in respect of all such proposals. It will no longer be necessary for the Indian 
companies to approach the Regional Offices of the Reserve Bank for "in principle" 
permission before receiving overseas investment or at a last stage for issuing shares to 
the foreign investor. Necessary notification under FERA to give effect to the revised 
simplified procedure is under issue. Once the revised procedure comes into effect after 
the issue of the notification under FERA, Indian companies getting foreign investment 
approval from SIA/FIPB will not require any further clearance from the Reserve Bank for 
the purposes of receiving inward remittance and issue of shares to the foreign investors. 
These companies will, however, have to file the required documents with the concerned 
Regional Offices of the Reserve Bank within 30 days after issue of shares to the foreign 
investors. It is also being provided that, before receiving the overseas investment in 
accordance with the FIPB approval, the board of the Indian company will pass a 
resolution taking note of the conditions stipulated by the FIPB and confirming that pre-
requisites, if any, laid down by the FIPB have been complied with.  With the above simplification in procedures, in future, proposals from Indian companies 
which conform to the foreign direct investment policy as laid down by the Government of 
India will no longer require case-by-case approval from the Reserve Bank. Cases 
pending with Reserve Bank of India will be dealt with expeditiously as per the procedure 
prevailing before the date of new notification.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/691  
 