December 22, 1998
Senior representatives of eight all India bank employees' unions called on Dr. Bimal Jalan,
Governor, Reserve Bank of India today to apprise him of the current status of discussions on the
present :
S/
 Raju, All India Bank Officers' Association
, Indian National Bank Officer's Congress
At the outset, the representatives expressed their disappointment at the manner in which the
negotiations were proceeding and the unrealistic stance of the Indian Banks' Association as a
result of which the negotiations were not progressing satisfactorily. They requested the Governor
Dr. Jalan urged them to come to an amicable settlement based on the paying capacity of banks.
He pointed to the impact of the East-Asian and Russian crises on the global financial system and
the increasing attention being accorded to the strength of the financial system in individual
country. In this context, the Governor stressed on the need to ensure that the financial position of
The Governor pointed out that historically, wage negotiations were a matter to be decided
between the banks and their unions and it was not a matter in which the Reserve Bank would like
to intervene on either side. He hoped that the on-going negotiations will be concluded speedily
so that the normal functioning and cordial atmosphere prevailing in the banking industry is not
vitiated. Given the goodwill and the desire to be accommodative on both sides, the Governor was
The union representatives thanked the Governor for listening to them patiently and urged him to
Alpana Killawala
Press Release : 1998-99/822
General Manager
use his good offices to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion.
confident of the wage negotiations concluding satisfactorily and peacefully.
Indian banks was strong and sound.
to intervene in the matter.
G.M.V. Nayak, Bank Employees Federation of India.
 B. Indurkar, National Organisation of Bank Workers Vinayak
Samant
 S. Sawant, Indian National Bank Employees' Federation Subhash
R.F. Shridharan, All India Bank Officers' Association
Shantha
P. Laxminarsaiah, National Confederation of Bank Employees
Suresh Dhopeshwarkar, All India Bank Employees' Association
 Chakraborty, All India Bank Employees' Association Tarkeshwar
Shri
wage negotiations in the banking industry. The following were 
the paying capacity of banks
an amicable settlement based on
RBI Governor urges bank unions for