` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
12 May 1998 
 
RBI modifies prudential norms for NBFCs 
 
The Reserve Bank had prescribed prudential norms for Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) in 
January 1998. In response to advice received from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and 
in consultation with them, it has been decided to introduce certain modifications in the norms for accounting 
for investments and provisioning against non-performing assets (NPAs). The modifications are designed to 
bring the prudential norms on the above two aspects in alignment with the accounting standard issued by the 
ICAI. The modifications are effective from January 31, 1998.  
(i) Accounting for investments  
As advised by the ICAI, the earlier bifurcation of long term investments into quoted and unquoted investments 
has been done away with. Under the modified norms, the unquoted equity shares in the nature of current 
investments only are required to be valued at cost or break up value whichever is lower. The companies also 
have the option to value these shares at their fair value. However, all long term investments including 
unquoted investments shall be valued as per the Accounting Standard issued by ICAI.  
(ii) Provisioning norms for hire purchase and lease assets  
The earlier norms did not take into account the value of underlying asset for the purpose of provisions against 
hire purchase and lease assets. Accordingly, the entire amount of overdue instalments net of the finance 
charges/income not taken to the credit of profit and loss account was to be fully provided for. Due credit has 
now been given under the revised norms to the value of underlying asset while making provisions against 
NPAs in the category of above assets.  
(iii) Risk weights on exposures to the PFIs and the bonds issued by PSBs  
Investments by NBFCs in the bonds of all public sector banks (PSBs) and fixed deposits/certificates of 
deposit/bonds issued by public financial institutions (PFIs) as also investment in the units of Unit Trust of India 
shall attract 20 per cent risk weight as against 100 per cent at present.  
(iv) Reversal of income in respect of loans and other credit facilities  
The NBFCs have been asked to reverse, with immediate effect, the income including interest/discount or any 
other charges on NPAs recognised and taken to the profit and loss account but remaining unrealised before 
the asset became NPA.  2. Prohibition to make loans and investments in case of default in repayment of public deposits  
With a view to further protecting the interests of the depositors, the NBFCs have been directed, with 
immediate effect, not to grant any loan or other credit facility or make investment or create any other asset as 
long as the default in repayment of public deposits in accordance with the provisions of Section 45QA(1) of 
the RBI Act exists.  
The detailed notification is available on the RBI website at http://www.rbi.org.in  
Circular: DNBS PD NO.CC 06/02.01/97-98 dated May 12, 1998 issued to to All Non- Banking Financial 
Companies and Residuary Non-Banking Companies (having Net Owned Fund of Rs.25 lakh and above) 
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/1068  
 