` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
August 20, 1998 
RBI announces package of measures 
Highlights of the Package of Measures announced by RBI today  
• As a temporary measure, CRR hiked from 10 per cent to 11 per cent from August 
29, 1998.  
• Repo rate hiked from 5 per cent to 8 per cent.  
• Forward cover for FIIs made available to 15 per cent of the existing equity 
investments as on June 11, in addition to the facility available for incremental 
investments.  
• Facility of rebooking of cancelled contracts in respect of import transactions 
withdrawn. The freedom continues for export transactions.  
• Facility of splitting the forward commitments into spot and forward legs 
withdrawn.  
• Use of EEFC funds allowed for domestic business payments also.  
• RBI to consider reduction in entitlements in EEFC accounts in cases of wilful 
delays in repatriation of export proceeds.  
• RBI to grant extension for repatriation of export proceeds in exceptional cases.  
• Authorised dealers to report end of the day and peak intra-day positions to RBI.  
In view of recent developments in the foreign exchange markets, the RBI has today 
announced the following measures:  
1. Increase in Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)  
As a temporary measure, in order to absorb excess liquidity, the CRR to be 
maintained by scheduled commercial banks is being increased from 10.0 per 
cent to 11.0 per cent effective from the fortnight beginning August 29, 1998.  
2. Increase in Repo rate  
The Repo rate will now be hiked from 5 per cent to 8 per cent. This rate will be 
reviewed periodically keeping in view the liquidity conditions.  
3. Forward cover for FIIs  
With effect from 11 June 1998, Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) were 
permitted to take forward cover from Authorised Dealers (A.Ds) in respect of the 
incremental value of their portfolio (equity) investments. Over a period of time, it 
is proposed to gradually extend the facility of forward cover to the existing 
investments of FIIs in the equity markets. Initially, A.Ds will be allowed to offer 
forward cover facility to FIIs to the extent of 15 per cent of the value of their investments as on 11 June 1998. This will be in addition to the facility already 
available for incremental investments.  
4. Forward contracts  
a) At present rebooking of cancelled forward contracts is not allowed for non-
trade transactions while it is allowed for trade related transactions. It has been 
decided to withdraw the facility of rebooking cancelled contracts for trade related 
transactions covering imports. However, the contracts can be rolled over on or 
before maturity. (Facility for rebooking cancelled contracts will continue to be 
available for exports as is the case now).  
b) In 1993, in order to provide flexibility, a facility was provided to all corporates 
to cover their forward commitments by first locking into a forward rate and 
thereafter covering the spot. However, instances of misuse of the facility have 
come to the notice of RBI where corporates have booked and cancelled the spot 
leg of the transaction without first locking into the forward leg. This facility for 
splitting forward and spot legs for a commitment is being withdrawn with 
immediate effect.  
5. EEFC Facility  
Exporters have been provided with the facility to utilise the balances in their 
EEFC accounts for effecting payments for all bonafide trade and business related 
transactions which are of current account nature. They have also been permitted 
to utilise these balances for approved capital account transactions. 
Representations have been received from exporting community to remove 
restrictions on use of funds in these accounts for all business related payments 
abroad as well as in India.  
It has been decided to permit exporters to use the balances in EEFC accounts 
for all business related payments in India and abroad at their discretion including 
payments of airfare and hotel expenditure. At the same time, exporters are 
advised that to the extent possible, balances available in EEFC accounts should 
be used for effecting payments abroad. If there is evidence of wilful delays in 
repatriation of export proceeds, RBI may, on a case by case basis, reduce the 
entilement or withdraw the facility of maintaining EEFC account.  
6. Extension of time for realisation  
Exporters are advised not to delay repatriation of export proceeds beyond the 
due date. Applications for extension of time limit will be considered only in 
exceptional cases where the delay in realisation is on account of external 
circumstances beyond the control of the exporters.  
7. Reporting of peak intra-day positions to RBI  
In addition to the present reporting of end of day position to the RBI, DEIO, A.Ds 
are advised to report (at close of business every day) their open position as at 
10.00 a.m. as also their peak intra-day position.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1998-99/213 