Principles for the Management of Interest Rate Risk
SUMMARY
1.     As part of its on-going efforts to address international bank supervisory issues, the Basle
1
Committee on Banking Supervision is issuing the attached paper on the management of interest
rate risk. In this, as in many other areas, sound controls are of crucial importance. It is essential
that banks have a comprehensive risk management process in place that effectively identifies,
measures, monitors and controls interest rate risk exposures, and that is subject to appropriate
board and senior management oversight. The attached paper describes each of these elements,
drawing upon experience in member countries and principles established in earlier publications by
the Committee. The objective of the paper is to outline a number of principles for use by
supervisory authorities when evaluating banks' interest rate risk management.
2.     The supervisory capital requirements established by the Basle Committee will, as from the
2
end of 1997, cover interest rate risk in the trading activities of banks . This paper is intended to set
out principles of more general application for the management of interest rate risk, independent of
whether the positions are part of the trading book or reflect banks' non-trading activities. It refers
to an interest rate risk management process, which includes the development of a business
strategy, the assumption of assets and liabilities in banking and trading activities, as well as a
system of internal controls. In particular, the paper addresses the need for effective interest rate
risk measurement, monitoring and control functions within the interest rate risk management
process.
3.     In developing these principles, the Committee has drawn not only on supervisory guidance in
member countries but also on the comments of the banking industry on the Committee's earlier
3
paper, issued for consultation in April 1993 as well as comments received on the draft of this
paper issued for consultation in January 1997. In addition, the present paper incorporates many of
4
the principles contained in the guidance issued by the Committee for derivatives activities, which
are reflected in the qualitative parameters for model-users in the recently published capital
standards for market risk.
1.
The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision is a Committee of banking supervisory authorities which was
established by the central-bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries in 1975. It consists of senior
representatives of bank supervisory authorities and central banks from Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States. It
usually meets at the Bank for International Settlements in Basle, where its permanent Secretariat is located.
2.
Amendment to the Capital Accord to Incorporate Market Risks, January 1996.
3
. Measurement of Banks' Exposure to Interest Rate Risk, Consultative proposal by the Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision, April 1993.
4
. Risk Management Guidelines for Derivatives, July 1994.4.     These principles are intended to be of general application, based as they are on practices
currently used by many international banks, even though their specific application will depend to
some extent on the complexity and range of activities undertaken by individual banks. Supervisory
authorities should, therefore, use them to re-assess their own supervisory methods and procedures
for monitoring how banks control interest rate risk. While the exact approach chosen by individual
supervisors will depend upon a host of factors, including their on-site and off-site supervisory
techniques and the degree to which external auditors are also used in the supervisory function, all
members of the Basle Committee agree that the principles set out here should be used in
evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of a bank's interest rate risk management.
5.     The Basle Committee is also distributing this paper to supervisory authorities worldwide in
the belief that the principles presented will provide a useful framework for prudent supervision of
interest rate risk. More generally, the Committee wishes to emphasise that sound risk
management practices are essential to the prudent operation of banks and to promoting stability in
the financial system as a whole.
6.     This paper also provides supervisory authorities with a framework for obtaining information
on interest rate risk. It broadly describes the types of basic information that should be available to
supervisory authorities to help them in evaluating banks' interest rate risk exposures. This
information can be used in a variety of ways by supervisory authorities to provide quantitative
assessments of the interest rate risk faced by banks.
7.     After careful consideration of the comments received, the Committee has set out principles
for sound interest rate risk management, rather than establishing a more standardised measure for
interest rate risk. The Committee will, however, keep the need for such more standardised
measures under review and may, at a later stage, revisit its approach in this area. In that context,
the Committee is aware that industry techniques for measuring and managing interest rate risk are
continuing to evolve, particularly for products with uncertain cash flows or repricing dates, such
as many mortgage-related products and retail deposits.
8.     Even though the Committee is not currently proposing capital charges specifically for interest
rate risk, all banks should have enough capital to support the risks they incur, including those
arising from interest rate risk. Individual supervisors may, of course, decide to apply capital
charges to their banking system in general or to individual banks that are more extensively
exposed to interest rate risk, or whose risk management processes are unsatisfactory.
9.     The Committee stipulates in the five sections III to VII of the paper the following eleven
principles for banking supervisory authorities to apply in assessing banks' management of interest
rate risk:
The role of the board and senior management
Principle 1:
In order to carry out its responsibilities, file board of directors in a bank shouldapprove strategies and policies with respect to interest rate risk management and
ensure that senior management takes the steps necessary to monitor and control
these risks. The board of directors should be informed regularly of the interest rate
risk exposure of the bank in order to assess the monitoring and controlling of such
risk.
Principle 2:
Senior management must ensure that the structure of the bank's business and the
level of interest rate risk it assumes are effectively managed, that appropriate
policies and procedures are established to control and limit these risks, and that
resources are available for evaluating and controlling interest rate risk.
Principle 3:
Banks should clearly define the individuals and/or committees responsible for
managing interest rate risk and should ensure that there is adequate separation of
duties in key elements of the risk management process to avoid potential conflicts of
interest. Banks should have risk measurement, monitoring and control functions
with clearly defined duties that are sufficiently independent from position-taking
functions of the bank and which report risk exposures directly to senior management
and the board of directors. Larger or more complex banks should have a designated
independent unit responsible for the design and administration of the bank's interest
rate risk measurement, monitoring and control functions.
Policies and procedures
Principle 4:
It is essential that banks' interest rate risk policies and procedures be clearly defined
and consistent with the nature and complexity of their activities. These policies
should be applied on a consolidated basis and, as appropriate, at the level of
individual affiliates, especially when recognising legal distinctions and possible
obstacles to cash movements among affiliates.
Principle 5:
It is important that banks identify the risks inherent in new products and activities
and ensure these are subject to adequate procedures and controls before being
introduced or undertaken. Major hedging or risk management initiatives should be
approved in advance by the board or its appropriate delegated committee.
Measurement and monitoring system
Principle 6:
It is essential that banks have interest rate risk measurement systems that capture all
material sources of interest rate risk and that assess the effect of interest rate
changes in ways that are consistent with the scope of their activities. The assumptionsunderlying the system should be clearly understood by risk managers and bank
management.
Principle 7:
Banks must establish and enforce operating limits and other practices that maintain
exposures within levels consistent with their internal policies.
Principle 8:
Banks should measure their vulnerability to loss under stressful market conditions -
including the breakdown of key assumptions - and consider those results when
establishing and reviewing their policies and limits for interest rate risk.
Principle 9:
Banks must have adequate information systems for measuring, monitoring,
controlling and reporting interest rate exposures. Reports must be provided on a
timely basis to the bank's board of directors, senior management and, where
appropriate, individual business line managers.
Internal controls
Principle 10:
Banks must have an adequate system of internal controls over their interest rate risk
management process. A fundamental component of the internal control system
involves regular independent reviews and evaluations or the effectiveness of the
system and, where necessary, ensuring that appropriate revisions or enhancements to
internal controls are made. The results of such reviews should be available to the
relevant supervisory authorities.
Information for supervisory authorities
Principle 11:
Supervisory authorities should obtain from banks sufficient and timely information
with which to evaluate their level of interest rate risk. This information should take
appropriate account of the range of maturities and currencies in each bank's
portfolio, including off-balance sheet items, as well as other relevant factors, such as
the distinction between trading and non-trading activities.
I. SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF INTEREST RATE RISK
1.     Interest rate risk is the exposure of a bank's financial condition to adverse movements in
interest rates. Accepting this risk is a normal part of banking and can be an important source of
profitability and shareholder value. However, excessive interest rate risk can pose a significant
threat to a bank's earnings and capital base. Changes in interest rates affect a bank's earnings by
changing its net interest income and the level of other interest-sensitive income and operatingexpenses. Changes in interest rates also affect the underlying value of the bank's assets, liabilities
and off-balance sheet instruments because the present value of future cash flows (and in some
cases, the cash flows themselves) change when interest rates change. Accordingly, an effective
risk management process that maintains interest rate risk within prudent levels is essential to the
safety and soundness of banks.
2.     Before setting out some principles for interest rate risk management, a brief introduction to
the sources and effects of interest rate risk might be helpful. Thus, the following sections describe
the primary forms of interest rate risk to which banks are typically exposed. These include
repricing risk, yield curve risk, basis risk and optionality, each of which is discussed in greater
detail below. These sections also describe the two most common perspectives for assessing a
bank's interest rate risk exposure: the earnings perspective and the economic value perspective.
As the names suggest, the earnings perspective focuses on the impact of interest rate changes on a
bank's near-term earnings, while the economic value perspective focuses on the value of a bank's
net cash flows.
A. Sources of Interest Rate Risk
1.     Repricing risk: As financial intermediaries, banks encounter interest rate risk in several
ways. The primary and most often discussed form of interest rate risk arises from timing
differences in the maturity (for fixed rate) and repricing (for floating rate) of bank assets, liabilities
and off-balance-sheet (OBS) positions. While such repricing mismatches are fundamental to the
business of banking, they can expose a bank's income and underlying economic value to
unanticipated fluctuations as interest rates vary. For instance, a bank that funded a long-term fixed
rate loan with a short-tem deposit could face a decline in both the future income arising from the
position and its underlying value if interest rates increase. These declines arise because the cash
flows on the loan are fixed over its lifetime, while the interest paid on the funding is variable, and
increases after the short-term deposit matures.
2.     Yield curve risk: Repricing mismatches can also expose a bank to changes in the slope and
shape of the yield curve. Yield curve risk arises when unanticipated shifts of the yield curve have
adverse effects on a bank's income or underlying economic value. For instance, the underlying
economic value of a long position in 10-year government bonds hedged by a short position in 5-
year government notes could decline sharply if the yield curve steepens, even if the position is
hedged against parallel movements in the yield curve.
3.     Basis risk: Another important source of interest rate risk (commonly referred to as basis risk)
arises from imperfect correlation in the adjustment of the rates earned and paid on different
instruments with otherwise similar repricing characteristics. When interest rates change, these
differences can give rise to unexpected changes in the cash flows and earnings spread between
assets, liabilities and OBS instruments of similar maturities or repricing frequencies. For example,
a strategy of funding a one year loan that reprices monthly based on the one month U.S. Treasury
Bill rate, with a one-year deposit that reprices monthly based on one month Libor, exposes the
institution to the risk that the spread between the two index rates may change unexpectedly.4.     Optionality: An additional and increasingly important source of interest rate risk arises from
the options embedded in many bank assets, liabilities and OBS portfolios. Formally, an option
provides the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy, sell, or in some manner alter the cash
flow of an instrument or financial contract. Options may be stand alone instruments such as
exchange-traded options and over-the-counter (OTC) contracts, or they may be embedded within
otherwise standard instruments. While banks use exchange-traded and OTC-options in both
trading and non-trading accounts, instruments with embedded options are generally most
important in non-trading activities. They include various types of bonds and notes with call or put
provisions, loans which give borrowers the right to prepay balances, and various types of non-
maturity deposit instruments which give depositors the right to withdraw funds at any time, often
without any penalties. If not adequately managed, the asymmetrical payoff characteristics of
instruments with optionality features can pose significant risk particularly to those who sell them,
since the options held, both explicit and embedded, are generally exercised to the advantage of the
holder and the disadvantage of the seller. Moreover, an increasing array of options can involve
significant leverage which can magnify the influences (both negative and positive) of option
positions on the financial condition of the firm.
B. Effects of Interest Rate Risk
1.     As the discussion above suggests, changes in interest rates can have adverse effects both on
a bank's earnings and its economic value. This has given rise to two separate, but complementary,
perspectives for assessing a bank's interest rate risk exposure.
2.     Earnings perspective: In the earnings perspective, the focus of analysis is the impact of
changes in interest rates on accrual or reported earnings. This is the traditional approach to interest
rate risk assessment taken by many banks. Variation in earnings is an important focal point for
interest rate risk analysis because reduced earnings or outright losses can threaten the financial
stability of an institution by undermining its capital adequacy and by reducing market confidence.
3.     In this regard, the component of earnings that has traditionally received the most attention is
net interest income (i.e. the difference between total interest income and total interest expense).
This focus reflects both the importance of net interest income in banks' overall earnings and its
direct and easily understood link to changes in interest rates. However, as banks have expanded
increasingly into activities that generate fee-based and other non-interest income, a broader focus
on overall net income - incorporating both interest and non-interest income and expenses - has
become more common. The non-interest income arising from many activities, such as loan
servicing and various asset securitisation programs, can be highly sensitive to market interest
rates. For example, some banks provide the servicing and loan administration function for
mortgage loan pools in return for a fee based on the volume of assets it administers. When interest
rates fall, the servicing bank may experience a decline in its fee income as the underlying
mortgages prepay. In addition, even traditional sources of non-interest income such as transaction
processing fees are becoming more interest rate sensitive. This increased sensitivity has led both
bank management and supervisors to take a broader view of the potential effects of changes in
market interest rates on bank earnings and to factor these broader effects into their estimated
earnings under different interest rate environments.4.     Economic value perspective: Variation in market interest rates can also affect the economic
value of a bank's assets, liabilities and OBS positions. Thus, the sensitivity of a bank's economic
value to fluctuations in interest rates is a particularly important consideration of shareholders,
management and supervisors alike. The economic value of an instrument represents an
assessment of the present value of its expected net cash flows discounted to reflect market rates.
By extension, the economic value of a bank can be viewed as the present value of bank's expected
net cash flows, defined as the expected cash flows on assets minus the expected cash flows on
liabilities plus the expected net cash flows on OBS positions. In this sense, the economic value
perspective reflects one view of the sensitivity of the net worth of the bank to fluctuations in
interest rates.
5.     Since the economic value perspective considers the potential impact of interest rate changes
on the present value of all future cash flows, it provides a more comprehensive view of' the
potential long-term effects of changes in interest rates than is offered by the earnings perspective.
This comprehensive view is important since changes in near-term earnings - the typical focus of
the earnings perspective - may not provide an accurate indication of the impact of interest rate
movements on the bank's overall positions.
6.     Embedded losses: The earnings and economic value perspectives discussed thus far focus on
how future changes in interest rates may affect a bank's financial performance. When evaluating
the level of interest rate risk it is willing and able to assume, a bank should also consider the
impact that past interest rates may have on future performance. In particular, instruments that are
not marked to market may already contain embedded gains or losses due to past rate movements.
These gains or losses may be reflected over time in the bank's earnings. For example, a long term
fixed rate loan entered into when interest rates were low and refunded more recently with
liabilities bearing a higher rate of interest will, over its remaining life, represent a drain on the
bank's resources.
II. SOUND INTEREST RATE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
1.     Sound interest rate risk management involves the application of four basic elements in the
management of assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet instruments:
- Appropriate board and senior management oversight;
- Adequate risk management policies and procedures;
- Appropriate risk measurement, monitoring and control functions; and
- Comprehensive internal controls and independent audits.
2.     The specific manner in which a bank applies these elements in managing its interest rate risk
will depend upon the complexity and nature of its holdings and activities as well as on the level of
interest rate risk exposure. What constitutes adequate interest rate risk management practices can
therefore vary considerably. For example, less complex banks whose senior managers are actively
involved in the details of day-to-day operations may be able to rely on relatively basic interest rate
risk management processes. However, other organisations that have more complex and wide-ranging activities are likely to require more elaborate and formal interest rate risk management
processes, to address their broad range of financial activities and to provide senior management
with the information they need to monitor and direct day-to-day activities. Moreover, the more
complex interest rate risk management processes employed at such banks require adequate
internal controls that include audits or other appropriate oversight mechanisms to ensure the
integrity of the information used by senior officials in overseeing compliance with policies and
limits. The duties of the individuals involved in the risk measurement, monitoring and control
functions must be sufficiently separate and independent from the business decision makers and
position takers to ensure the avoidance of conflicts of interest.
3.     As with other risk factor categories, the Committee believes that interest rate risk should be
monitored on a consolidated, comprehensive basis, to include interest rate exposures in
subsidiaries. At the same time, however, institutions should fully recognise any legal distinctions
and possible obstacles to cash flow movements among affiliates and adjust their risk management
process accordingly. While consolidation may provides a comprehensive measure in respect of
interest rate risk, it may also underestimate risk when positions in one affiliate are used to offset
positions in another affiliate. This is because a conventional accounting consolidation may allow
theoretical offsets between such positions from which a bank may not in practice be able to
benefit because of legal or operational constraints. Management should recognise the potential for
consolidated measures to understate risks in such circumstances.
III. BOARD AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT OF INTEREST
5
RATE RISK
       Effective oversight by a bank's board of directors and senior management is critical to a
sound interest rate risk management process. It is essential that these individuals are aware of
their responsibilities with regard to interest rate risk management and that they adequately
perform their roles in overseeing and managing interest rate risk.
A.  Board of Directors
Principle 1:
In order to carry out its responsibilities, the board of directors in a bank should approve strategies
and policies with respect to interest rate risk management and ensure that senior management
takes the steps necessary to monitor and control these risks. The board of directors should be
informed regularly of the interest rate risk exposure of the bank in order to assess the monitoring
and controlling of such risk.
1.     The board of directors has the ultimate responsibility for understanding the nature and the
level of interest rate risk taken by the bank. The board should approve broad business strategies
and policies that govern or influence the interest rate risk of the bank. It should review the overall
objectives of the bank with respect to interest rate risk and should ensure the provision of clear
guidance regarding the level of interest rate risk acceptable to the bank. The board should also
approve policies that identify lines of authority and responsibility for managing interest rate risk
exposures.2.     Accordingly, the board of directors is responsible for approving the overall policies of the
bank with respect to interest rate risk and for ensuring that management takes the steps necessary
to identify, measure, monitor, and control these risks. The board or a specific committee of the
board should periodically review information that is sufficient in detail and timeliness to allow it to
understand and assess the performance of senior management in monitoring and controlling these
risks in compliance with the bank's board-approved policies. Such reviews should be conducted
regularly, being carried out more frequently where the bank holds significant positions in complex
instruments. In addition, the board or one of its committees should periodically re-evaluate
significant interest rate risk management policies as well as overall business strategies that affect
the interest rate risk exposure of the bank.
5 This section refers to a management structure composed of a board of directors and senior management. The
Committee is aware that there are significant differences in legislative and regulatory frameworks across
countries as regards the functions of the board of directors and senior management. In some countries, the
board has the main, if not exclusive, function of supervising the executive body (senior management, general
management) so as to ensure that the latter fulfils its tasks. For this reason, in some cases, it is known as a
supervisory board. This means that the board has no executive functions. In other countries, by contrast, the
board has a broader competence in that it lays down the general framework for the management of the bank.
Owing to these differences, the notions of the board of directors and the senior management we used in this
paper not to identify legal constructs but rather to label two decision-making functions within a bank.
3.     The board of directors should encourage discussions between its members and senior
management - as well as between senior management and others in the bank - regarding the
bank's interest rate risk exposures and management process. Board members need not have
detailed technical knowledge of complex financial instruments, legal issues, or of sophisticated
risk management techniques. They have the responsibility, however, to ensure that senior
management has a full understanding of the risks incurred by the bank and that the bank has
personnel available who have the necessary technical skills to evaluate and control these risks.
B. Senior Management
Principle 2:
Senior management must ensure that the structure of the bank's business and the level of
interest rate risk it assumes are effectively managed, that appropriate policies and
procedures are established to control and limit these risks, and that resources are available
for evaluating and controlling interest rate risk.
1.     Senior management is responsible for ensuring that the bank has adequate policies and
procedures for managing interest rate risk on both a long-term and day-to-day basis and that it
maintains clear lines of authority and responsibility for managing and controlling this risk.
Management is also responsible for maintaining:
- appropriate limits on risk taking;
- adequate systems and standards for measuring risk;- standards for valuing positions and measuring performance;
- a comprehensive interest rate risk reporting and interest rate risk management review
process; and
- effective internal controls.
2.     Interest rate risk reports to senior management should provide aggregate information as well
as sufficient supporting detail to enable management to assess the sensitivity of the institution to
changes in market conditions and other important risk factors. Senior management should also
review periodically the organisation's interest rate risk management policies and procedures to
ensure that they remain appropriate and sound. Senior management should also encourage and
participate in discussions with members of the board and, where appropriate to the size and
complexity of the bank, with risk management staff regarding risk measurement, reporting and
management procedures.
3.     Management should ensure that analysis and risk management activities related to interest
rate risk are conducted by competent staff with technical knowledge and experience consistent
with the nature and scope of the bank's activities. There should be sufficient depth in staff
resources to manage these activities and to accommodate the temporary absence of key personnel.
C. Lines of Responsibility and Authority for Managing Interest Rate Risk
Principle 3:
Banks should clearly define the individuals and/or committees responsible for managing interest
rate risk and should ensure that there is adequate separation of duties in key elements of the risk
management process to avoid potential conflicts of interest. Banks should have risk measurement,
monitoring and control functions with clearly defined duties that are sufficiently independent from
position-taking functions of the bank and which report risk exposures directly to senior
management and the board of directors. Larger or more complex banks should have a designated
independent unit responsible for the design and administration of the bank's interest rate risk
measurement, monitoring and control functions.
1.     Banks should clearly identify the individuals and/or committees responsible for conducting
all of the various elements of interest rate risk management. Senior management should define
lines of authority and responsibility for developing strategies, implementing tactics and conducting
the risk measurement and reporting functions of the interest rate risk management process. Senior
management should also provide reasonable assurance that all activities and all aspects of interest
rate risk are covered by a bank's risk management process.
2.     Care should be taken to ensure that there is adequate separation of duties in key elements of
the risk management process to avoid potential conflicts of interest. Management should ensure
that sufficient safeguards exist to minimise the potential that individuals initiating risk-taking
positions may inappropriately influence key control functions of the risk management process
such as the development and enforcement of policies and procedures, the reporting of risks to
senior management, and the conduct of back-office functions. The nature and scope of such
safeguards should be in accordance with the size and structure of the bank. They should also becommensurate with the volume and complexity of interest rate risk incurred by the banks and the
complexity of its transactions and commitments. Larger or more complex banks should have a
designated independent unit responsible for the design and administration of the bank's interest
rate risk measurement, monitoring and control functions. The control functions carried out by this
unit, such as administering the risk limits, are part of the overall internal control system.
3.     The personnel charged with measuring, monitoring and controlling interest rate risk should
have a well-founded understanding of all types of interest rate risk faced throughout the bank.
IV. ADEQUATE RISK MANAGEMENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Principle 4:
It is essential that banks' interest rate risk policies and procedures be clearly defined and
consistent with the nature and complexity of their activities. These policies should be
applied on a consolidated basis and, as appropriate, at the level of individual affiliates,
especially when recognising legal distinctions and possible obstacles to cash movements
among affiliates.
1.     Banks should have clearly defined policies and procedures for limiting and controlling
interest rate risk. These policies should be applied on a consolidated basis and, as appropriate, at
specific affiliates or other units of the bank. Such policies and procedures should delineate lines of
responsibility and accountability over interest rate risk management decisions and should clearly
define authorised instruments, hedging strategies and position-taking opportunities. Interest rate
risk policies should also identify quantitative parameters that define the level of interest rate risk
acceptable for the bank. Where appropriate, such limits should be further specified for certain
types of instruments, portfolios, and activities. All interest rate risk policies should be reviewed
periodically and revised as needed. Management should define the specific procedures and
approvals necessary for exceptions to policies, limits and authorisations.
2.     A policy statement identifying the types of instruments and activities that the bank may
employ or conduct is one means whereby management can communicate their tolerance of risk on
a consolidated basis and at different legal entities. If such a statement is prepared, it should clearly
identify permissible instruments, either specifically or by their characteristics, and should also
describe the purposes or objectives for which they may be used. The statement should also
delineate a clear set of institutional procedures for acquiring specific instruments, managing
portfolios, and controlling the bank's aggregate interest rate risk exposure.
Principle 5:
It is important that banks identify the interest rate risks inherent in new products and
activities and ensure these are subject to adequate procedures and controls before being
introduced or undertaken. Major hedging or risk management initiatives should be
approved in advance by the board or its appropriate delegated committee.3.     Products and activities that are new to the bank should undergo a careful pre-acquisition
review to ensure that the bank understands their interest rate risk characteristics and can
incorporate them into its risk management process. When analysing whether or not a product or
activity introduces a new element of interest rate risk exposure, the bank should be aware that
changes to an instrument's maturity, repricing or repayment terms can materially affect the
product's interest rate risk characteristics. To take a simple example, a decision to buy and hold a
30 year treasury bond would represent a significantly different interest rate risk strategy for a bank
that had previously limited its investment maturities to less than 3 years. Similarly, a bank
specialising in fixed-rate short-term commercial loans that then engages in residential fixed-rate
mortgage lending should be aware of the optionality features of the risk embedded in many
mortgage products that allow the borrower to prepay the loan at any time with little, if any,
penalty.
4.     Prior to introducing a new product, hedging, or position-taking strategy, management should
ensure that adequate operational procedures and risk control systems are in place. The board or its
appropriate delegated committee should also approve major hedging or risk management
initiatives in advance of their implementation. Proposals to undertake new instruments or new
strategies should contain these features:
- a description of the relevant product or strategy;
- an identification of the resources required to establish sound and effective interest rate
risk management of the product or activity;
- an analysis of the reasonableness of the proposed activities in relation to the bank's
overall financial condition and capital levels; and
- the procedures to be used to measure, monitor and control the risks of the proposed
product or activity.
V. RISK MEASUREMENT, MONITORING AND CONTROL
FUNCTIONS
A. Interest Rate Risk Measurement
Principle 6:
It is essential that banks have interest rate risk measurement systems that capture all
material sources of interest rate risk and that assess the effect of interest rate changes in
ways that are consistent with the scope of their activities. The assumptions underlying the
system should be clearly understood by risk managers and bank management.
       In general, but depending on the complexity and range of activities of the individual bank,
banks should have interest rate risk measurement systems that assess the effects of rate changes
on both earnings and economic value. These systems should provide meaningful measures of a
bank's current levels of interest rate risk exposure, and should be capable of identifying any
excessive exposures that might arise.1.     Measurement systems should:
- assess all material interest rate risk associated with a bank's assets, liabilities, and OBS
positions;
- utilise generally accepted financial concepts and risk measurement techniques; and
- have well documented assumptions and parameters.
2.     As a general rule, it is desirable for any measurement system to incorporate interest rate risk
exposures arising from the full scope of a bank's activities, including both trading and non-trading
sources. This does not preclude different measurement systems and risk management approaches
being used for different activities; however, management should have an integrated view of
interest rate risk across products and business lines.
3.     A bank's interest rate risk measurement system should address all material sources of interest
rate risk including repricing, yield curve, basis and option risk exposures. In many cases, the
interest rate characteristics of a bank's largest holdings will dominate its aggregate risk profile.
While all of a bank's holdings should receive appropriate treatment, measurement systems should
evaluate such concentrations with particular rigour. Interest rate risk measurement systems should
also provide rigorous treatment of those instruments which might significantly affect a bank's
aggregate position, even if they do not represent a major concentration. Instruments with
significant embedded or explicit option characteristics should receive special attention.
4.     A number of techniques are available for measuring the interest rate risk exposure of both
earnings and economic value. Their complexity ranges from simple calculations to static
simulations using current holdings to highly sophisticated dynamic modelling techniques that
reflect potential future business and business decisions.
5.     The simplest techniques for measuring a bank's interest rate risk exposure begin with a
maturity/repricing schedule that distributes interest-sensitive assets, liabilities and OBS positions
into "time bands" according to their maturity (if fixed rate) or time remaining to their next
repricing (if floating rate). These schedules can be used to generate simple indicators of the
interest rate risk sensitivity of both earnings and economic value to changing interest rates. When
this approach is used to assess the interest rate risk of current earnings, it is typically referred to as
gap analysis. The size of the gap for a given time band - that is, assets minus liabilities plus OBS
exposures that reprice or mature within that time band - gives an indication of the bank's repricing
risk exposure.
6.     A maturity/repricing schedule can also be used to evaluate the effects of changing interest
rates on a bank's economic value by applying sensitivity weights to each time band. Typically,
such weights are based on estimates of the duration of the assets and liabilities that fall into each
time-band, where duration is a measure of the percent change in the economic value of a position
that will occur given a small change in the level of interest rates. Duration-based weights can be
used in combination with a maturity/repricing schedule to provide a rough approximation of thechange in a bank's economic value that would occur given a particular set of changes in market
interest rates.
7.     Many banks (especially those using complex financial instruments or otherwise having
complex risk profiles) employ more sophisticated interest rate risk measurement systems than
those based on simple maturity/repricing schedules. These simulation techniques typically involve
detailed assessments of the potential effects of changes in interest rates on earnings and economic
value by simulating the future path of interest rates and their impact on cash flows. In static
simulations, the cash flows arising solely from the bank's current on-and off-balance sheet
positions are assessed. In a dynamic simulation approach, the simulation builds in more detailed
assumptions about the future course of interest rates and expected changes in a bank's business
activity over that time. These more sophisticated techniques allow for dynamic interaction of
payments streams and interest rates, and better capture the effect of embedded or explicit options.
8.     Regardless of the measurement system, the usefulness of each technique depends on the
validity of the underlying assumptions and the accuracy of the basic methodologies used to model
interest rate risk exposure. In designing interest rate risk measurement systems, banks should
ensure that the degree of detail about the nature of their interest-sensitive positions is
commensurate with the complexity and risk inherent in those positions. For instance, using gap
analysis, the precision of interest rate risk measurement depends in part on the number of time
bands into which positions are aggregated. Clearly, aggregation of positions/cash flows into broad
time bands implies some loss of precision. In practice, the bank must assess the significance of the
potential loss of precision in determining the extent of aggregation and simplification to be built
into the measurement approach.
9.     Estimates of interest rate risk exposure, whether linked to earnings or economic value,
utilise, in some form, forecasts of the potential course of future interest rates. For risk
management purposes, banks should incorporate a change in interest rates that is sufficiently large
to encompass the risks attendant to their holdings. Banks should consider the use of multiple
scenarios, including potential effects in changes in the relationships among interest rates (i.e. yield
curve risk and basis risk) as well as changes in the general level of interest rates. For determining
probable changes in interest rates, simulation techniques could, for example, be used. Statistical
analysis can also play an important role in evaluating correlation assumptions with respect to basis
or yield curve risk.
10.     The integrity and timeliness of data on current positions is also a key component of the risk
measurement process. A bank should ensure that all material positions and cash flows, whether
stemming from on- or off-balance-sheet positions, are incorporated into the measurement system
on a timely basis. Where applicable, these data should include information on the coupon rates or
cash flows of associated instruments and contracts. Any manual adjustments to underlying data
should be clearly documented, and the nature and reasons for the adjustments should be clearly
understood. In particular, any adjustments to expected cash flows for expected prepayments or
early redemptions should be well reasoned and such adjustments should be available for review.11.     In assessing the results of interest rate risk measurement systems, it is important that the
assumptions underlying the system be clearly understood by risk managers and bank
management. In particular, techniques using sophisticated simulations should be used carefully so
that they do not become "black boxes", producing numbers that have the appearance of precision,
but that in fact are not very accurate when their specific assumptions and parameters are revealed.
Key assumptions should be recognised by senior management and risk managers and should be
re-evaluated at least annually. They should also be clearly documented and their significance
understood. Assumptions used in assessing the interest rate sensitivity of complex instruments
and instruments with uncertain maturities should be subject to particularly rigorous
documentation and review.
12.     When measuring interest rate risk exposure, two further aspects call for more specific
comment: the treatment of those positions where behavioural maturity differs from contractual
maturity and the treatment of positions denominated in different currencies. Positions such as
savings and sight deposits may have contractual maturities or may be open-ended, but in either
case, depositors generally have the option to make withdrawals at any time. In-addition, banks
often choose not to move rates paid on these deposits in line with changes in market rates. These
factors complicate the measurement of interest rate risk exposure, since not only the value of the
positions but also the timing of their cash flows can change when interest rates vary. With respect
to banks' assets, prepayment features of mortgages and mortgage related instruments also
introduce uncertainty about the timing of cash flows on these positions. These issues are described
in more detail in Annex A, which forms an integral part of this text.
13.     Banks with positions denominated in different currencies can expose themselves to interest
rate risk in each of these currencies. Since yield curves vary from currency to currency, banks
generally need to assess exposures in each. Banks with the necessary skills and sophistication, and
with material multi-currency exposures, may choose to include in their risk measurement process
methods to aggregate their exposures in different currencies using assumptions about the
correlation between interest rates in different currencies. A bank that uses correlation assumptions
to aggregate its risk exposures should periodically review the stability and accuracy of those
assumptions. The bank also should evaluate what its potential risk exposure would be in the event
that such correlations break down.
B. Limits
Principle 7:
Banks must establish and enforce operating limits and other practices that maintain
exposures within levels consistent with their internal policies.
1.     The goal of interest rate risk management is to maintain a bank's interest rate risk exposure
within self-imposed parameters over a range of possible changes in interest rates. A system of
interest rate risk limits and risk taking guidelines provides the means for achieving that goal. Such
a system should set boundaries for the level of interest rate risk for the bank and, where
appropriate, should also provide the capability to allocate limits to individual portfolios, activitiesor business units. Limit systems should also ensure that positions that exceed certain
predetermined levels receive prompt management attention. An appropriate limit system should
enable management to control interest rate risk exposures, initiate discussion about opportunities
and risks, and monitor actual risk taking against predetermined risk tolerances.
2.     A bank's limits should be consistent with its overall approach to measuring interest rate risk.
Aggregate interest rate risk limits clearly articulating the amount of interest rate risk acceptable to
the bank should be approved by the board of directors and re-evaluated periodically. Such limits
should be appropriate to the size, complexity and capital adequacy of the bank as well as its ability
to measure and manage its risk. Depending on the nature of a bank's holdings and its general
sophistication, limits can also be identified with individual business units, portfolios, instrument
types or specific instruments. The level of detail of risk limits should reflect the characteristics of
the bank's holdings including the various sources of interest rate risk to which the bank is
exposed.
3.     Limit exceptions should be made known to appropriate senior management without delay.
There should be a clear policy as to how senior management will be informed and what action
should be taken by management in such cases. Particularly important is whether limits are
absolute in the sense that they should never be exceeded or whether, under specific
circumstances, which should be clearly described, breaches of limits can be tolerated for a short
period of time. In that context, the relative conservatism of the chosen limits may be an important
factor.
4.     Regardless of their level of aggregation, limits should be consistent with the bank's overall
approach to measuring interest rate risk and should address the potential impact of changes in
market interest rates on reported earnings and the bank's economic value of equity. From an
earnings perspective, banks should explore limits on the variability of net income as well as net
interest income in order to fully assess the contribution of non-interest income to the interest rate
risk exposure of the bank. Such limits usually specify acceptable levels of earnings volatility under
specified interest rate scenarios.
5.     The form of limits for addressing the effect of rates on a bank's economic value of equity
should be appropriate for the size and complexity of its underlying positions. For banks engaged
in traditional banking activities and with few holdings of long-term instruments, options,
instruments with embedded options, or other instruments whose value may be substantially
altered given changes in market rates, relatively simple limits on the extent of such holdings may
suffice. For more complex banks, however, more detailed limit systems on acceptable changes in
the estimated economic value of equity of the bank may be needed.
6.     Interest rate risk limits may be keyed to specific scenarios of movements in market interest
rates such as an increase or decrease of a particular magnitude. The rate movements used in
developing these limits should represent meaningful stress situations taking into account historic
rate volatility and the time required for management to address exposures. Limits may also be
based on measures derived from the underlying statistical distribution of interest rates, such as
earnings at risk or economic value at risk techniques. Moreover, specified scenarios should takeaccount of the full range of possible sources of interest rate risk to the bank including mismatch,
yield curve, basis and option risks. Simple scenarios using parallel shifts in interest rates may be
insufficient to identify such risks.
C. Stress Testing
Principle 8:
Banks should measure their vulnerability to loss under stressful market conditions -
including the breakdown of key assumptions - and consider those results when establishing
and reviewing their policies and limits for interest rate risk.
       The risk measurement system should also support a meaningful evaluation of the effect of
stressful market conditions on the bank. Stress testing should be designed to provide information
on the kinds of conditions under which the bank's strategies or positions would be most
vulnerable, and thus may be tailored to the risk characteristics of the bank. Possible stress
scenarios might include abrupt changes in the general level of interest rates, changes in the
relationships among key market rates (i.e. basis risk), changes in the slope and the shape of the
yield curve (i.e. yield curve risk), changes in the liquidity of key financial markets or changes in
the volatility of market rates. In addition, stress scenarios should include conditions under which
key business assumptions and parameters break down. The stress testing of assumptions used for
illiquid instruments and instruments with uncertain contractual maturities is particularly critical to
achieving an understanding of the bank's risk profile. In conducting stress tests, special
consideration should be given to instruments or markets where concentrations exist as such
positions may be more difficult to liquidate or offset in stressful situations. Banks should consider
"worst case" scenarios in addition to more probable events. Management and the board of
directors should periodically review both the design and the results of such stress tests, and ensure
that appropriate contingency plans are in place.
D. Interest Rate Risk Monitoring and Reporting
Principle 9:
Banks must have adequate information systems for measuring, monitoring, controlling
and reporting interest rate exposures. Reports must be provided on a timely basis to the
bank's board of directors, senior management and, where appropriate, individual business
line managers.
1.     An accurate, informative, and timely management information system is essential for
managing interest rate risk exposure, both to inform management and to support compliance with
board policy. Reporting of risk measures should be regular and should clearly compare current
exposure to policy limits. In addition, past forecasts or risk estimates should be compared with
actual results to identify any modelling shortcomings.
2.    Reports detailing the interest rate risk exposure of the bank should be reviewed by the board
on a regular basis. While the types of reports prepared for the board and for various levels of
management will vary based on the bank's interest rate risk profile, they should, at a minimum
include the following:- summaries of the bank's aggregate exposures;
- reports demonstrating the bank's compliance with policies and limits;
- results of stress tests including those assessing breakdowns in key assumptions and
parameters; and
summaries of the findings of reviews of interest rate risk policies, procedures, and the adequacy of
the interest rate risk measurement systems, including any findings of internal and external auditors
and retained consultants.
VI. INTERNAL CONTROLS
Principle 10:
Banks must have an adequate system of internal controls over their interest rate risk
management process. A fundamental component of the internal control system involves
regular independent reviews and evaluations of the effectiveness of the system and, where
necessary, ensuring that appropriate revisions or enhancements to internal controls are
made. The results of such reviews should be available to relevant supervisory authorities.
1.     Banks should have adequate internal controls to ensure the integrity of their interest rate risk
management process. These internal controls should be an integral part of the institution's overall
system of internal control. They should promote effective and efficient operations, reliable
financial and regulatory reporting, and compliance with relevant laws, regulations and institutional
policies. An effective system of internal control for interest rate risk includes:
- a strong control environment;
- an adequate process for identifying and evaluating risk;
- the establishment of control activities such as policies, procedures and methodologies;
- adequate information systems; and,
- continual review of adherence to established policies and procedures.
With regard to control policies and procedures, attention should be given to appropriate approval
processes, exposure limits, reconciliations, reviews and other mechanisms designed to provide a
reasonable assurance that the institution's interest rate risk management objectives are achieved.
Many attributes of a sound risk management process, including risk measurement, monitoring and
control functions, are key aspects of an effective system of internal control. Banks should ensure
that all aspects of the internal control system are effective, including those aspects that are not
directly part of the risk management process.
2.     In addition, an important element of a bank's internal control system over its interest rate risk
management process is regular evaluation and review. This includes ensuring that personnel are
following established policies and procedures, as well as ensuring that the procedures that were
established actually accomplish the intended objectives. Such reviews and evaluations should also
address any significant change that may impact the effectiveness of controls, such as changes in
market conditions, personnel, technology, and structures of compliance with interest rate riskexposure limits, and ensure that appropriate follow-up with management has occurred for any
limits that were exceeded. Management should ensure that all such reviews and evaluations are
conducted regularly by individuals who are independent of the function they are assigned to
review. When revisions or enhancements to internal controls are warranted, there should be a
mechanism in place to ensure that these are implemented in a timely manner.
3.     Reviews of the interest rate risk measurement system should include assessments of the
assumptions, parameters, and methodologies used. Such reviews should seek to understand, test,
and document the current measurement process, evaluate the system's accuracy, and recommend
solutions to any identified weaknesses. If the measurement system incorporates one or more
subsidiary systems or processes, the review should include testing aimed at ensuring that the
subsidiary systems are well-integrated and consistent with each other in all critical respects. The
results of this review, along with any recommendations for improvement, should be reported to
senior management and/or the board and acted upon in a timely manner.
4.     The frequency and extent to which a bank should re-evaluate its risk measurement
methodologies and models depends, in part, on the particular interest rate risk exposures created
by holdings and activities, the pace and nature of market interest rate changes, and the pace and
complexity of innovation with respect to measuring and managing interest rate risk.
5.     Banks, particularly those with complex risk exposures, should have their measurement,
monitoring and control functions reviewed on a regular basis by an independent party (such as an
internal or external auditor). In such cases, reports written by external auditors or other outside
parties should be available to relevant supervisory authorities. It is essential that any independent
reviewer ensure that the bank's risk measurement system is sufficient to capture all material
elements of interest rate risk, whether arising from on- or off-balance sheet activities. Such a
reviewer should consider the following factors in making the risk assessment:
- the quantity of interest rate risk, e.g.
 the volume and price sensitivity of various products;
 the vulnerability of earnings and capital under differing rate changes including yield
curve twists;
 the exposure of earnings and economic value to various other forms of interest rate
risk, including basis and optionality risk.
- the quality of interest rate risk management, e.g. whether the bank's internal measurement system is appropriate to the nature, scope,
and complexities of the bank and its activities;
 whether the bank has an independent risk control unit responsible for the design and
administration of the risk measurement, monitoring and control functions;
 whether the board of directors and senior management is actively involved in the risk
control process;
 whether internal policies, controls and procedures concerning interest rate risk are
well documented and complied with;
 whether the assumptions of the risk measurement system are well documented, data
accurately processed, and data aggregation is proper and reliable;
 whether the organisation has adequate staffing to conduct a sound risk management
process.
6.     In those instances where the independent review is conducted by internal auditors, banks are
encouraged to have the risk measurement, monitoring and control functions periodically reviewed
by external auditors.
VII. MONITORING OF INTEREST RATE RISK BY SUPERVISORY
AUTHORITIES
Principle 11:
Supervisory authorities should obtain from banks sufficient and timely information with
which to evaluate their level of interest rate risk. This information should take appropriate
account of the range of maturities and currencies in each bank's portfolio, including off-
balance-sheet items, as well as other relevant factors, such as the distinction between
trading and non-trading activities.
1.     Supervisory authorities should, on a regular basis, obtain sufficient information to assess
individual banks' interest rate risk exposures. In order to minimise reporting burden, this
information could be obtained through standardised reports that are submitted by banks, through
on-site examinations, or by other means, such as internal management reports. The precise
information obtained could differ among supervisors, but should enable the supervisor to assess
the level and direction of a bank's interest rate exposure. Such information may be generated from
the bank's internal measures or from more standardised reports. As a minimum, supervisors
should have enough information to identify and monitor banks that have significant repricing
mismatches. Information contained in internal management reports, such as maturity/repricing
gaps, earnings and economic value simulation estimates, and the results of stress tests can be
particularly useful in this regard.
2.     A supervisory reporting framework that collects information on a bank's positions by
remaining maturity or time to next repricing is one method that supervisors may use for this
purpose. Under such an approach, a bank would categorise its interest-sensitive assets, liabilitiesand OBS positions into a series of repricing time bands or maturity categories. In addition, the
information should identify the balances by specific types of instruments that differ significantly in
their cash flow characteristics.
3.     Supervisors may want to collect additional information on those positions where the
behavioural maturity is different from the contractual maturity. Reviewing the results of a bank's
internal model, perhaps under a variety of different assumptions, scenarios and stress tests, can
also be highly informative.
4.     Banks operating in different currencies can expose themselves to interest rate risk in each of
these currencies. Supervisory authorities, therefore, may want banks to analyse their exposures in
different currencies separately, at least when exposures in different currencies are material.
5.     Another question is the extent to which interest rate risk should be viewed on a whole bank
basis or whether the trading book, which is marked to market, and the banking book, which is
often not, should be treated separately. As a general rule, it is desirable for any measurement
system to incorporate interest rate risk exposures arising from the full scope of a bank's activities,
including both trading and non-trading sources. This does not preclude different measurement
systems and risk management approaches being used for different activities; however,
management should have an integrated view of interest rate risk across products and business
lines. Supervisors may want to obtain more specific information on how trading and non-trading
activities are measured and incorporated into a single measurement system. They should also
ensure that interest rate risk in both trading and non-trading activities is properly managed and
controlled.
6.     A meaningful analysis of interest rate risk is only possible if the supervisor receives the
relevant information regularly and on a timely basis. Since the risk profile in the traditional
banking business changes less rapidly than in the trading business, quarterly or semi-annual
reporting of the former may be sufficient for many banks. Some of the factors that supervisors
may wish to consider when designing a specific reporting framework are described in greater
detail in Annex B, which forms an integral part of this text.
September 1997
ANNEX A
INTEREST RATE RISK MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
1.     This annex provides a brief overview of the various techniques used by banks to measure the
exposure of earnings and of economic value to changes in interest rates. The variety of the
techniques ranges from calculations that rely on simple maturity and repricing tables, to static
simulations based on current on- and off-balance sheet positions, to highly sophisticated dynamic
modelling techniques that incorporate assumptions about the behaviour of the bank and its
customers in response to changes in the interest rate environment. Some of these generalapproaches can be used to measure interest rate risk exposure from both an earnings and an
economic value perspective, while others are more typically associated with only one of these two
perspectives. In addition, the methods vary in their ability to capture the different forms of interest
rate exposure: the simplest methods are intended primarily to capture the risks arising from
maturity and repricing mismatches, while the more sophisticated methods can more easily capture
the full range of risk exposures.
2.     As this discussion suggests, the various measurement approaches described below have their
strengths and weaknesses in terms of providing accurate and reasonable measures of interest rate
risk exposure. Ideally, a bank's interest rate risk measurement system would take into account the
specific characteristics of each individual interest-sensitive position, and would capture in detail
the full range of potential movements in interest rates. In practice, however, measurement systems
embody simplifications that move away from this ideal. For instance, in some approaches,
positions may be aggregated into broad categories, rather than modelled separately, introducing a
degree of measurement error into the estimation of their interest rate sensitivity. Similarly, the
nature of interest rate movements that each approach can incorporate may be limited: in some
cases, only a parallel shift of the yield curve may be assumed or less than perfect correlations
between interest rates may not be taken into account. Finally, the various approaches differ in their
ability to capture the optionality inherent in many positions and instruments.  The discussion in the
following sections will highlight the areas of simplification that typically characterise each of the
major interest rate risk measurement techniques.
A.  Repricing Schedules
1.     The simplest techniques for measuring a bank's interest rate risk exposure begin with a
maturity/repricing schedule that distributes interest-sensitive assets, liabilities and off-balance
sheet positions into a certain number of predefined time bands according to their maturity (if fixed
rate) or time remaining to their next repricing (if floating rate). Those assets and liabilities lacking
definitive repricing intervals (e.g. sight deposits or savings accounts) or actual maturities that
could vary from contractual maturities (e.g. mortgages with an option for early repayment) are
assigned to repricing time bands according to the judgement and past experience of the bank.
2.      Gap analysis: Simple maturity/repricing schedules can be used to generate simple indicators
of the interest rate risk sensitivity of both earnings and economic value to changing interest rates.
When this approach is used to assess the interest rate risk of current earnings, it is typically
referred to as gap analysis. Gap analysis was one of the first methods developed to measure a
bank's interest rate risk exposure, and continues to be widely used by banks. To evaluate earnings
exposure, interest rate sensitive liabilities in each time band are subtracted from the corresponding
interest rate sensitive assets to produce a repricing "gap" for that time band. This gap can be
multiplied by an assumed change in interest rates to yield an approximation of the change in net
interest income that would result from such an interest rate movement. The size of the interest rate
movement used in the analysis can be based on a variety of factors, including historical
experience, simulation of potential future interest rate movements, and the judgement of bank
management.
3.     A negative, or liability-sensitive, gap occurs when liabilities exceed assets (including off-
balance sheet positions) in a given time band. This means that an increase in market interest rates
could cause a decline in net interest income. Conversely, a positive, or asset-sensitive, gap impliesthat the bank's net interest income could decline as a result of a decrease in the level of interest
rates.
4.     These simple gap calculations can be augmented by information on the average coupon on
assets and liabilities in each time band. This information can be used to place the results of the gap
calculations in context. For instance, information on the average coupon rate could be used to
calculate estimates of the level of net interest income arising from positions maturing or repricing
within a given time band, which would then provide a "scale" to assess the changes in income
implied by the gap analysis.
5.     Although gap analysis is a very commonly used approach to assessing interest rate risk
exposure, it has a number of shortcomings. First, gap analysis does not take account of variation
in the characteristics of different positions within a time band. In particular, all positions within a
given time band are assumed to mature or reprice simultaneously, a simplification that is likely to
have greater impact on the precision of the estimates as the degree of aggregation within a time
band increases. Moreover, gap analysis ignores differences in spreads between interest rates that
could arise as the level of market interest rates changes (basis risk). In addition, it does not take
into account any changes in the timing of payments that might occur as a result of changes in the
interest rate environment. Thus, it fails to account for differences in the sensitivity of income that
may arise from option-related positions. For these reasons, gap analysis provides only a rough
approximation to the actual change in net interest income which would result from the chosen
change in the pattern of interest rates. Finally most gap analyses fail to capture variability in non-
interest revenue and expenses, a potentially important source of risk to current income.
6.     Duration: A maturity/repricing schedule can also be used to evaluate the effects of changing
interest rates on a bank's economic value by applying sensitivity weights to each time band.
Typically, such weights are based on estimates of the duration of the assets and liabilities that fall
into each time band. Duration is a measure of the percent change in the economic value of a
6
position that will occur given a small change in the level of interest rates. It reflects the timing
and size of cash flows that occur before the instrument's contractual maturity. Generally, the
longer the maturity or next repricing date of the instrument and the smaller the payments that
occur before maturity (e.g. coupon payments), the higher the duration (in absolute value). Higher
duration implies that a given change in the level of interest rates will have a larger impact on
economic value.
7.     Duration-based weights can be used in combination with a maturity/repricing schedule to
provide a rough approximation of the change in a bank's economic value that would occur given a
particular change in the level of market interest rates. Specifically, an "average" duration is
assumed for the positions that fall into each time band. The average durations are then multiplied
by an assumed change in interest rates to construct a weight for each time band. In some cases,
different weights are used for different positions that fall within a time band, reflecting broad
differences in the coupon rates and maturities (for instance, one weight for assets, and another for
liabilities). In addition, different interest rate changes are sometimes used for different time bands,
generally to reflect differences in the volatility of interest rates along the yield curve. The weighted
gaps are aggregated across time bands to produce an estimate of the change in economic value of
the bank that would result from the assumed changes in interest rates.
8.     Alternatively, an institution could estimate the effect of changing market rates by calculating
the precise duration of each asset, liability and off-balance sheet position and then deriving the netposition for the bank based on these more accurate measures, rather than by applying an estimated
average duration weight to all positions in a given time band. This would eliminate potential errors
occurring when aggregating positions/cash flows. As another variation, risk weights could also be
designed for each time band on the basis of actual
6.
In its simplest form, duration measures changes in economic value resulting from a percentage change of
interest rates under the simplifying assumptions that changes in value are proportional to changes in the level
of interest rates and that the timing of payments is fixed. Two important modifications of simple duration are
commonly used that relax one or both of these assumptions. The first case is so-called modified duration.
Modified duration - which is standard duration divided by l + r, where r is the level of market interest rates -
is an elasticity. As such, it reflects the percentage change in the economic value of the instrument for a given
percentage change in l + r. As with simple duration, it assumes a linear relationship between percentage
changes in value and percentage changes in interest rates. The second form of duration relaxes this
assumption, as well as the assumption that the timing of payments is fixed. Effective duration is the
percentage change in the price of the relevant instrument for a basis point change in yield.
percent changes in market values of hypothetical instruments that would result from a specific
scenario of changing market rates. That approach - which is sometimes referred to as effective
duration - would better capture the non-linearity of price movements arising from significant
changes in market interest rates and, thereby, would avoid an important limitation of duration.
9.     Estimates derived from a standard duration approach may provide an acceptable
approximation of a bank's exposure to changes in economic value for relatively non-complex
banks. Such estimates, however, generally focus on just one form of interest rate risk exposure -
repricing risk. As a result, they may not reflect interest rate risk arising - for instance - from
changes in the relationship among interest rates within a time band (basis risk). In addition,
because such approaches typically use an average, duration for each time band, the estimates will
not reflect differences in the actual sensitivity of positions that can arise from differences in
coupon rates and the timing of payments. Finally, the simplifying assumptions that underlie the
calculation of standard duration means that the risk of options may not be well-captured.
B.  Simulation Approaches
1.     Many banks (especially those using complex financial instruments or otherwise having
complex risk profiles) employ more sophisticated interest rate risk measurement systems than
those based on simple maturity/repricing schedules. These simulation techniques typically involve
detailed assessments of the potential effects of changes in interest rates on earnings and economic
value by simulating the future path of interest rates and their impact on cash flows.
2.     In some sense, simulation techniques can be seen as an extension and refinement of the
simple analysis based on maturity/repricing schedules. However, simulation approaches typically
involve a more detailed breakdown of various categories of on- and off-balance sheet positions, so
that specific assumptions about the interest and principal payments and non-interest income and
expense arising from each type of position can be incorporated. In addition, simulation techniques
can incorporate more varied and refined changes in the interest rate environment, ranging from
changes in the slope and shape of the yield curve to interest rate scenarios derived from Monte
Carlo simulations.3.     In static simulations, the cash flows arising solely from the bank's current on- and off-
balance sheet positions are assessed. For assessing the exposure of earnings, simulations
estimating the cash flows and resulting earnings streams over a specific period are conducted
based on one or more assumed interest rate scenarios. Typically, although not always, these
simulations entail relatively straightforward shifts or tilts of the yield curve, or changes of spreads
between different interest rates. When the resulting cash flows are simulated over the entire
expected lives of the bank's holdings and discounted back to their present values, an estimate of
7
the change in the bank's economic value can be calculated.
4.     In a dynamic simulation approach, the simulation builds in more detailed assumptions about
the future course of interest rates and the expected changes in a bank's business activity over that
time. For instance, the simulation could involve assumptions about a bank's strategy for changing
administered interest rates (on savings deposits, for example), about the behaviour of the bank's
customers (e.g. withdrawals from sight and savings deposits) and/or about the future stream of
business (new loans or other transactions) that the bank will encounter. Such simulations use
these assumptions about future activities and reinvestment strategies to project expected cash
flows and estimate dynamic earnings and economic value outcomes. These more sophisticated
techniques allow for dynamic interaction of payments stream and interest rates, and better capture
the effect of embedded or explicit options.
5.     As with other approaches, the usefulness of simulation-based interest rate risk measurement
techniques depends on the validity of the underlying assumptions and the accuracy of the basic
methodology. The output of sophisticated simulations must be assessed largely in the light of the
validity of the simulation's assumptions about future interest rates and the behaviour of the bank
and its customers. One of the primary concerns that arises is that such simulations do not become
"black boxes" that lead to false confidence in the precision of the estimates.
C.  Additional Issues
1.     One of the most difficult tasks when measuring interest rate risk is how to deal with those
positions where behavioural maturity differs from contractual maturity (or where there is no stated
contractual maturity). On the asset side of the balance sheet, such positions may include
mortgages and mortgage-related securities, which can be subject to prepayment. In some
countries, borrowers have the discretion to prepay their mortgages with little or no penalty, a
situation that creates uncertainty about the timing of the cash flows associated with these
instruments. Although there is always some volatility in prepayments resulting from demographic
factors (such as death, divorce, or job transfers) and macroeconomic conditions, most of the
uncertainty surrounding prepayments arises from the response of borrowers to movements in
interest rates. In general, declines in interest rates result in increasing levels of prepayments, as
borrowers refinance their loans at lower yields. In contrast, when interest rates rise unexpectedly,
prepayment rates tend to slow, leaving the bank with a larger than anticipated volume of
mortgages paying below current market rates.
7
The duration analysis described in the previous section can be viewed as a very simple form of static
.
simulation.2.     On the liability side, such positions include so-called non-maturity deposits such as sight
deposits and savings deposits, which can be withdrawn, often without penalty, at the discretion of
the depositor. The treatment of such deposits is further complicated by the fact that the rates
received by depositors tend not to move in close correlation with changes in the general level of
market interest rates. In fact, banks can and do administer the rates on the accounts with the
specific intention of managing the volume of deposits retained.
3.     The treatment of positions with embedded options is an issue of special concern in
measuring the exposure of both current earnings and economic value to interest rate changes. In
addition, the issue arises across the full spectrum of approaches to interest rate measurement,
from simple gap analysis to the most sophisticated simulation techniques. In the maturity/repricing
schedule framework, banks typically make assumptions about the likely timing of payments and
withdrawals on these positions and "spread" the balances across time bands accordingly. For
instance, it might be assumed that certain percentages of a pool of 30 year mortgages prepay in
given years during the life of the mortgages. As a result, a large share of the mortgage balances
that would have been assigned to the time band containing 30 year instruments would be spread
among nearer term time bands. In the simulation framework, more sophisticated behavioural
assumptions could be employed, such as the use of option-adjusted pricing models to better
estimate the timing and magnitude of cash flows under different interest rate environments. In
addition, the simulations can incorporate the bank's assumptions about its likely future treatment
of administered interest rates on non-maturity deposits.
4.     As with other elements of interest rate risk measurement, the quality of the estimates of
interest rate risk exposure depends on the quality of the assumptions about the future cash flows
on the positions with uncertain maturities. Banks typically look to the past behaviour of such
positions for guidance about these assumptions. For instance, econometric or statistical analysis
can be used to analyse the behaviour of a bank's holdings in response to past interest rate
movements. Such analysis is particularly useful to assess the likely behaviour of non-maturity
deposits, which can be influenced by bank-specific factors such as the nature of the bank's
customers and local or regional market conditions. In the same vein, banks may use statistical
prepayment models - either models developed internally by the bank or models purchased from
outside developers - to generate expectations about mortgage-related cash flows. Finally, input
from managerial and business units within the bank could have an important influence, since these
areas may be aware of planned changes to business or repricing strategies that could affect the
behaviour of the future cash flows of positions with uncertain maturities.
ANNEX B
MONITORING OF INTEREST RATE RISK BY SUPERVISORY
AUTHORITIES
1.     This annex provides a brief overview of some of the factors that supervisory authorities
might consider in obtaining and analysing information on individual banks' exposures to interest
rate risk. As discussed in Section VII of the text, supervisory authorities should obtain information
sufficient to assess banks' exposures to interest rate risk in a timely fashion. Such information maybe obtained through on-site examinations, through reports that are submitted by banks on a
regular basis, or through other means.
2.     While the precise information that is obtained will differ across supervisory authorities, one
approach that some may adopt is a reporting framework that collects information on a bank's
positions by remaining maturity or time to next repricing. Under such an approach, a bank would
categorise its interest-sensitive assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet positions into a series of
repricing time bands or maturity categories. The two sections that follow discuss the
considerations that a supervisor should take into account in specifying the number of time bands
and the grouping of positions in the reporting framework. The final section of this annex describes
some general approaches that supervisory authorities may wish to consider in analysing the
information that is obtained through such a reporting framework.
A.  Time Bands
1.     If a reporting framework is used in which information is collected by time to next repricing,
the number and specific categories of time bands chosen should be sufficient to provide
supervisors with a reasonable basis for identifying potentially significant repricing mismatches.
The bands, however, could vary materially across countries, both in number and in range,
depending on the lending and investing practices and experiences of banks in individual markets.
2.     The usefulness of supervisory analysis crucially depends on the precision with which
maturities of the positions and cash flows are recorded in the system. In analysing interest rate
sensitivities, it is not enough to know when an instrument matures. Rather, the critical factor is
when the instrument reprices. Therefore, the emphasis of this section is on repricing rather than
maturity. For cash flows whose repricing is unambiguous, the most precise approach is to use the
exact repricing date. Any aggregation of positions/cash flows in time bands or zones necessarily
implies a loss of information and a lower degree of precision. For this reason, the number of time
bands in a repricing ladder framework always reflects a decision regarding the necessary level of
precision and the cost of pursuing greater accuracy. Supervisory authorities could use the
repricing ladder in the standardised approach of the Amendment to the Capital Accord as a
starting point when developing a reporting framework that meets their particular needs. The
breakdown can, of course, be modified by supervisors either in a general way or in a specific way
for banks where the nature of business activities warrants or justifies a different reporting form.
B. - Items
1.      As with the time bands, the breakdown of assets and liabilities could differ among
supervisors. A reporting system should include information for all rate sensitive assets, liabilities
and OBS positions, and should also identify balances, by specific types of instruments, when
those instruments have or may have materially different cash flow characteristics. Specific
attention should be given to items whose behavioural repricings differ from contractual maturities
such as savings deposits and in some countries mortgage related instruments. Further information
on these issues is provided in Annex A. If the volume of these positions is significant, they should
be reported separately so as to facilitate an assessment of the underlying options risk in the bank
balance sheet structure.
2.      The analysis of interest rate risk may be more difficult if a bank is engaged in trading
activities. As a general rule, it is desirable for any measurement system to incorporate interest raterisk exposures arising from the full scope of a bank's activities, including both trading and non-
trading sources. This does not preclude different measurement systems and risk management
approaches being used for different activities; however, management should have an integrated
view of interest rate risk across products and business lines. Supervisors may wish to permit
banks that manage their interest rate risk exposures on an integrated basis to aggregate trading
and non-trading positions in the overall reporting framework. However, it is important to
recognise that in many countries different accounting rules may apply to the trading book and the
traditional banking book. Under these accounting rules, losses in the trading book may not always
be offset by profits in the banking book if the latter are unrealised. Furthermore, unlike the
banking book, the composition of the trading portfolio changes significantly from week to week or
even day to day because it is managed separately and according to a different (shorter) risk
horizon than the banking book. This means that a hedge that is present on a given day may
disappear a few days later. Supervisors should, therefore, review the risk management practices
and information systems of banks that conduct material trading activities and should obtain the
information necessary to ensure that interest rate risk in both trading and non-trading activities is
properly managed and controlled.
C. Supervisory Analysis
1.     A reporting framework designed along these lines may provide supervisors with a flexible
tool for analysing interest rate risk. Supervisors can use this basic information to perform their
own assessments of a bank's exposure and risk profile.
2.     Such assessments may provide insights regarding an institution's exposure to parallel shifts,
a flattening or steepening of the yield curve or its inversion with rate changes of different
magnitude either based on statistical probabilities or a worst case analysis. For banks with
important exposures in foreign currencies, analysis investigating different assumptions on
correlations between interest rates in different currencies can be useful. With respect to
instruments with behavioural maturities, supervisors may wish to assess alternative assumptions
than those used by the institution.
3.     The focus of supervisors' quantitative analysis can either be the impact of interest rate
changes on current earnings or on the economic value of the banks' portfolio. In conducting their
analysis information about average yields on assets and liabilities in each time band may be useful
and supervisors may wish to collect such information in addition to pure position data.
4.     Depending on their overall approach, supervisors may conduct their analysis of interest rate
risk either on a case by case basis or as part of a broader system designed to identify outliers with
apparently excessive risk-taking.
5.     By conducting an assessment of interest rate risk using the proposed framework, supervisors
may gain more insight into an institution's risk profile than with a reporting system that reduces
the complexity of interest rate risk to a single number. In doing so, supervisors can become more
familiar with the sensitivity of risk measures to changes in the underlying assumptions, and the
evaluation process may produce as many insights as the quantitative result itself.
6.     Regardless of the extent of a supervisor's own independent quantitative analysis, a, bank's
own interest rate risk measure, whether reported as part of a basic supervisory reporting system or
reviewed as part of an individual assessment of a bank's risk management, is an importantconsideration in the supervisory process. Reviewing the results of a bank's internal model can be
highly informative, but can also be a difficult process because of the multitude of assumptions and
modelling techniques that are important, but which need to be made transparent to supervisors. To
be most useful, the information received should indicate the contribution of principal elements of a
bank's portfolio to the risk profile under different assumptions with respect to interest rate changes
and the market response. Finally, any quantitative analysis should be supplemented by a review of
internal management reports in order to gain greater insights into management's evaluation and
management of risks, its methods for measuring exposures, and factors not reflected in the
information available in the limited reporting to supervisors.