conducted a series of seminars in major centres on 
on 
RBI and FEDAI the transition to euro would be smooth.
taken. They had also effected necessary changes in systems to handle and report euro
transactions. All banks reconfirmed that 
Helpline' desks at their
euro. In November 1998, it had issued detailed instructions on the subject
P. V. Sadanandan
Press Release : 1998-99/863
Asstt. Manager
smooth transition.
for any doubt/clarification. Banks will work in close collaboration with RBI/FEDAI to ensure a
5. Banks appreciated the initiatives taken by RBI, and FEDAI also offered to be the nodal point
specifically advised to organise training programmes for the staff and the customers.
and circulated the Report of the Working Group on Euro to the banks. Thereafter, banks were
to the introduction of 
4. RBI has been closely monitoring the preparedness of the Indian banking system in the run up
banks.
arrangements for consultations and interactions among themselves and with correspondent
officers at key branches to handle customer queries and so on. They expressed their
euro, identified nodal centre for all queries by staff and customers on Central Office as access 
euro, established ' seminars, many banks had brought out booklets on 
organising order to prepare not only their staff but also the customers for the euro. Besides 
3. During the meeting, the banks also reported special initiatives taken by several of them in
branches.
detailed guidelines on this issue had been received by
settlement instructions and changes in Swift messaging standards has been addressed and action
setting up correspondent arrangements, opening of euro deposit accounts, training of staff,
2. All the participating banks reconfirmed that the various issues relating to the transition such as
FEDAI representative was confident that with the issue of all relevant operating instructions by
FEDAI. A number of banks had also advised them about the euro correspondent arrangements.
euro which among others contains full set of instructions on the subject issued by RBI and
euro. FEDAI has also brought out a booklet
detailed instructions to banks on market practices and changes to FEDAI rules. FEDAI had also
follow-up action after the release of a comprehensive RBI Report on the subject, and issued
Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association of India (FEDAI) mentioned that it had initiated active
euro. Deputy Governor (Dr. Y. V. Reddy) presided over the meeting. The representative from
commercial banks to review and confirm the preparedness of the Indian banks for switching to
The Reserve Bank of India had convened a meeting on December 29, 1998 of major Indian
December 30, 1998
euro Banks' preparedness for switch to 