A FRAMEWORK FOR MEASURING AND MANAGING LIQUIDITY
(September 1992)
       In its work on the supervision of liquidity, the Basle Committee has focused on developing a
greater understanding of the way in which international banks manage their liquidity on a global
basis, on the premise that supervision of liquidity is particularly effective if based on a dialogue
between bank and supervisor. This paper brings together practice and techniques currently
employed by major international banks in a single analytical framework. While no bank may
follow this framework precisely, it is a model which is believed to be an example of current sound
management practice and which could provide useful guidance to all banks.
       The seventh ICBS provides an opportunity for other supervisory authorities to contribute to
this work and it is the Committee's intention to prepare a revised version of this paper taking
account of comments made at Cannes which could then be circulated to supervisory authorities
worldwide with the possibility of it being made available through them to commercial banks.
I Purpose of the analysis
       Measuring and managing liquidity are among the most vital activities of commercial banks.
By assuring a bank's ability to meet its liabilities as they come due, liquidity management can
reduce the probability of an irreversible adverse situation developing. Even in cases where a crisis
develops because of a problem elsewhere at a bank, such as a severe deterioration in asset quality
or the uncovering of fraud, or where a crisis reflects a generalised loss of confidence in financial
institutions, the time available to a bank to address the problem will be determined by its liquidity.
Indeed, the importance of liquidity transcends the individual institution, since a liquidity shortfall
at a single institution can have system-wide repercussions. For this reason, the analysis of liquidity
requires bank managements to measure not only the liquidity positions of banks on an ongoing
basis but also to examine how funding requirements are likely to evolve under crisis scenarios.
       This paper sets out in general terms the main elements of a model liquidity measurement and
management framework. The framework strikes a balance between quantitative and qualitative
factors used to assess liquidity, and provides a methodology for analysing balance sheet and off-
balance-sheet activities consistently.
       While this paper focuses on the use of the framework by large banks, the approach it
describes appears to have broad applicability to bank liquidity measurement and control, even for
small, strictly domestic banks. In particular, good management information systems, central
liquidity control, analysis of net funding requirements under alternative scenarios, diversification
of funding sources, and contingency planning are crucial elements of strong liquidity management
at a bank of any size or scope of operations. The information systems and analysis needed to
implement the approach, however, can probably absorb fewer resources and be much less
complex at a smaller institution or one that is active in fewer markets than the large,
internationally active banks contemplated in this paper.
II. Policy issues
A. Information and reporting arrangements
                Virtually every financial transaction or commitment has implications for a bank's
liquidity. Moreover, the transformation of illiquid assets into more liquid ones is a key activity ofbanks. Thus, a bank's liquidity policies and liquidity management approach should form key
elements of a bank's general business strategy. Understanding the context of liquidity
management involves examining a bank's managerial approach to funding and liquidity
operations and its liquidity planning under alternative scenarios.
                 In particular, all banks should have an articulated and specific liquidity policy setting
out the general importance management places on liquidity. Such a policy should also enunciate
specific policies on particular aspects of liquidity management, such as the relative reliance on the
use of certain financial instruments and the encouragement of closer relationships with
supervisors. This general policy should be approved by a bank's board of directors.
                 An important element in such a policy will be a liquidity reporting structure designed
to provide senior management with timely information and to be flexible enough to deal with
various contingencies that may arise during crises. Banks that stress the importance of liquidity
assign ultimate responsibility for setting liquidity policy and reviewing liquidity decisions to the
bank's highest level of management, and their decisions need to be reviewed periodically by the
board of directors.
                 A bank's investment in information systems designed to gather and analyse detailed
information on assets and liabilities may need to be substantial. Because market conditions and a
bank's own liquidity needs change constantly, extensive computer systems are often necessary to
provide management with relevant information on an accurate and up-to-date basis: Such systems
can also be helpful in projecting the bank's liquidity positions under a variety of conditions.
Sometimes these systems are integrated into information systems monitoring other activities or
risk exposures of the bank.
                 Finally, a schedule of frequent routine liquidity reviews and less frequent, but more in-
depth reviews should be provided for. These reviews provide the opportunity to re-examine and
refine a bank's liquidity policies and practices in the light of a bank's liquidity experience and
developments in its business.
B. Treatment of foreign currencies
                For banks with an international presence, the treatment of assets and liabilities in
multiple currencies adds a layer of complexity to liquidity management for two reasons. First,
banks are often less well known to liability holders in foreign currency markets. In the event of
market concerns, especially if they relate to a bank's domestic operating environment, these
liability holders may not be able to distinguish rumour from fact as well or as quickly as domestic
currency customers. Second, in the event of a disturbance, a bank may not always be able to
mobilise domestic liquidity to meet foreign currency funding requirements. .
                Hence, when a bank conducts its business in multiple currencies, its management must
make two key decisions. The first concerns management structure. A bank with funding
requirements in foreign currencies will generally use one of three approaches. It may completely
centralise liquidity management (the head office managing liquidity for the whole bank in every
currency). Alternatively, it may decentralise by assigning operating divisions responsibility for
their own liquidity, but subject to limits imposed by the head office or frequent, routine reporting
to the head office. For example, a non-European bank might assign its London office
responsibility for the liquidity management for its European operations in all currencies. As a third
approach, a bank may assign responsibility for liquidity in the home currency and for overallcoordination to the home office, and responsibility for the bank's global liquidity in each major
foreign currency to the management of the foreign office in the country issuing that currency. For
example, the treasurer in the Tokyo office of a non-Japanese bank could be responsible for the
bank's global liquidity needs in yen. All of these approaches, however, provide head office
management with the opportunity to monitor and control worldwide liquidity.
                 The second decision concerns the liquidity strategy in each currency. In the ordinary
course of business, a bank must decide how foreign currency funding needs will be met. To what
extent, for example, will a bank fund foreign currency needs in domestic currency and convert the
proceeds to foreign currency through the foreign exchange market or currency swaps? How will a
bank manage the associated risk that exchange markets will cease to be available? A bank's
assessment will depend on the size of its funding needs, its access to foreign currency funding
markets, and its capacity to rely on off-balance-sheet instruments (e.g. standby lines of credit,
swap facilities, etc.).
                 A bank must also develop a back-up liquidity strategy for circumstances in which its
normal approach to funding foreign currency operations is disrupted. Such a strategy will call for
drawing either on home currency sources and converting them to foreign currency through the
exchange markets or drawing on back-up sources in particular foreign currencies. For example,
back-up liquidity for all currencies may be provided by the head office using the home currency,
based on an assessment of the bank's access to the foreign exchange market and the derivative
markets under the conditions in which the original liquidity disturbance is likely to occur.
Alternatively, a bank's management may decide that certain foreign currencies make up a
sufficient part of its liquidity needs to warrant separate liquidity back-up. In that case, either the
home office or the regional treasurer for each specific currency would develop a contingency
strategy and negotiate liquidity backstop facilities for those currencies.
III. A framework for measuring and managing liquidity
       The framework for assessing and managing bank liquidity presented here has three major
dimensions: (A) measuring and managing net funding requirements, (B) managing market
access, and (C) contingency planning.
A. Measuring and managing net funding requirements
                The analysis of net funding requirements involves the construction of a maturity ladder
and the calculation of cumulative net excess or deficit of funds at selected maturity dates. A
bank's net funding requirements are determined by analysing its future cash flows based on
assumptions of the future behaviour of assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet items, and then
calculating the cumulative net excess over the time frame for the liquidity assessment.
(i) The maturity ladder
                A maturity ladder should be used to compare a bank's future cash inflows to its future
cash outflows over a series of specified time periods. Cash inflows arise from maturing assets,
saleable non-maturing assets and established credit lines that can be tapped. Cash outflows
include liabilities falling due and contingent liabilities, especially committed lines of credit that can
be drawn down. In Table 1, the maturity ladder is represented by placing sources and amounts of
cash inflows on one side of the page and sources and amounts of outflows on the other.                 In constructing the maturity ladder, a bank has to allocate each cash inflow or outflow
to a given calendar date from a starting point, usually the next day. (A bank must be clear about
the clearing and settlement conventions it is using to determine its initial point.) As a preliminary
step to constructing the maturity ladder, cash inflows can be ranked by the date on which assets
mature or a conservative estimate of when credit lines can be drawn down. Similarly, cash
outflows can be ranked by the date on which liabilities fall due, the earliest date a liability holder
could exercise an early repayment option, or the earliest date contingencies can be called.
Significant interest and other cash flows should also be included. The difference between cash
inflows and cash outflows in each period, the excess or deficit of funds, becomes a starting-point
for a measure of a bank's future liquidity excess or shortfall at a series of points in time.
                 It is this net funding requirement that requires management. Typically, a bank may find
substantial funding gaps in distant periods and will endeavour to fill these gaps by influencing the
maturity of transactions so as to offset the gap. For example, if there is a significant funding
requirement 30 days hence, a bank may choose to acquire an asset maturing on that day, or seek
to renew or roll over a liability. The closer a large gap gets, the more difficult it is to offset. Thus,
banks will typically collect data on relatively distant periods so as to maximise the opportunities to
close the gap before it gets too close. Most banks would regard it as important that any remaining
borrowing requirement should be limited to an amount which experience suggests is comfortably
within the bank's capacity to fund in the market.
(ii) Alternative scenarios
                Evaluating whether a bank is sufficiently liquid depends in large measure on the
behaviour of cash flows under different conditions. Analysing liquidity thus entails laying out
"what if" scenarios. Three scenarios provide useful benchmarks: a bank's "going-concern"
condition, a bank-specific crisis, and a general market crisis. Under each scenario, a bank should
try to account for any significant positive or negative liquidity swings that could occur.
(a)            The going-concern scenario establishes a benchmark for the "normal" behaviour of
balance sheet-related cash flows in the ordinary course of business at a bank. This scenario it
useful in managing a bank's use of deposit and other debt markets. By establishing such a
benchmark, a bank can manage its net funding requirements so that it is not faced with very large
needs on any given day, so avoiding the impact of temporary constraints on its ability to roll over
liabilities because of market disruptions or concerns about its condition.
(b)            Assessing liquidity under the second scenario, a liquidity crisis at an individual bank
that remains confined to that bank, provides one type of "worst-case" benchmark. The key
underlying assumption in this scenario is that many of the bank's liabilities could not be rolled over
or replaced and would have to be repaid at maturity so that the bank would have to wind down its
books to some degree. This is the scenario implicit in many existing bank supervisory liquidity
measures. While a severe liquidity crisis at an individual bank usually stems from a fundamental,
bank-specific problem not related to its liquidity, a bank's ability to honour its deposit maturities
under such conditions can provide the time that the bank would need to address the underlying
problem. If a bank can weather such a "worst-case" scenario, it can almost certainly survive less
drastic firm-specific problems.(c)            The last scenario is some form of general market crisis where liquidity is affected at all
banks in one or more markets. The key underlying assumption that banks need to make in this
scenario is that severe tiering by perceived credit quality would occur, so that differences in
funding access among banks or among classes of financial institutions would widen, benefiting
some and harming others. Although some banks may believe that central banks would ensure that
key markets would continue to function in some form, severe market disruption would not
necessarily be prevented. For bank management, this represents a second type of "worst-case"
scenario that a bank would wish to weather. A supervisor or central bank may find this scenario to
be of particular interest when surveying the liquidity profile of the entire banking sector. The
collective results would suggest the size of the total liquidity buffer in the banking system and the
likely distribution of liquidity problems among large institutions if the banking system as a whole
experiences a shortage of liquidity.
                 A bank will need to assign the timing of cash flows for each type of asset and liability
by assessing the probability of the behaviour of those cash flows in the scenario being examined.
These decisions about the specific timing and the size of cash flows arc an integral part of the
construction of the maturity ladder under each scenario. For each funding source, for example, a
bank would have to decide whether the liability would be: (1) repaid in full at maturity; (2)
gradually run off over the next few weeks; or (3) virtually certain to be rolled over or available if
tapped. The bank's historical experience of the pattern of flows and a knowledge of market
conventions could guide a bank's decisions, but judgement often plays a large role, especially in
crisis scenarios. Uncertainty is an inevitable element in choosing between possible behaviour
patterns, and that dictates a conservative approach that would bias a bank toward assigning later
dates to cash inflows and earlier dates to cash outflows.
                 Hence, the timing of cash inflows and outflows on the maturity ladder can differ
between the going-concern, approach and the two crisis scenarios, as shown in Table 2. In
constructing the going-concern maturity ladder, conservative assumptions need to be made about
the behaviour of cash flows that can replace the contractual cash flows. For example, many
maturing loans would be rolled over in the normal course of business and some proportion of
transactions and savings deposits would also be rolled over or could be easily replaced.
                 In a bank-specific crisis scenario it is assumed that a bank will be unable to roll over or
replace many or most of its liabilities, and that it may have to wind down its books to some
degree. The assumptions under the third scenario, a general market crisis, may differ quite
sharply from the assumptions made for a bank-specific crisis. For example, a bank may believe,
based upon its historical experience, that its ability to control the level and timing of future cash
flows from a stock of saleable assets in a bank-specific funding crisis would deteriorate little from
normal conditions. However, in a general market crisis, this capacity may fall off sharply if few
institutions are willing or able to make cash purchases of less liquid assets. On the other hand, a
bank that has a high reputation in the market may actually benefit from a flight to quality as
potential depositors seek out the safest home for their funds. Banks may also anticipate that
central banks would ensure that key markets continue to function but not necessarily without
significant disruption.
(iii) Measuring liquidity over the chosen time-frame                 The evolution of a bank's liquidity profile under one or more scenarios can be tabulated
or portrayed graphically, by cumulating the balance of expected cash inflows and cash outflows at
several time points. A stylised liquidity graph can be constructed enabling the evolution of the
cumulative net excess or deficit of funds to be compared under the three scenarios in order to
provide further insights into a bank's liquidity and to check how consistent and realistic the
assumptions are for the individual bank. For example, a high-quality institution may look very
liquid in a going-concern scenario, marginally liquid in a bank-specific crisis and quite liquid in a
general market crisis. In contrast, a weaker institution might be far less liquid in the general crisis
than it would in a bank-specific crisis.
                 It is important to note that the relevant time-frame for active liquidity management is
short, generally extending out no more than a few weeks. While most banks would not actively
manage their net funding requirements over a period much longer than four or five weeks,
managements may consider information on requirements beyond that time frame to be useful.
Clearly, banks active in markets for longer-term assets and liabilities will need to use a longer
time-frame than banks which are active in short-term money markets and which are in a better
position to fill funding gaps at short notice. However, even this latter category of banks may find it
worthwhile to tailor the maturity of new transactions to offset gaps some time off.
                 A longer time horizon may also generate useful information on which to base more
strategic decisions on the extent to which a bank may rely on particular markets.
(iv) Assumptions used in determining cash flows
                Since a bank's future liquidity position will be affected by factors that cannot always be
forecast with precision, assumptions need to be reviewed frequently to determine their continuing
validity, especially given the rapidity of change in banking markets. The total number of major
assumptions to be made, however, is fairly limited. This section attempts to catalogue the liquidity
assumptions under four broad categories: (a) assets, (b) liabilities, (c) off-balance-sheet activities,
and (d) other.
(a) Assets
               Assumptions about a bank's future stock of assets include their potential marketability
and use as collateral of existing assets which could increase cash inflows, and the extent to which
maturing assets will be renewed, and new assets acquired, thus reducing contractual cash inflows.
       Determining the level of a bank's potential assets involves answering three questions:
• what proportion of maturing assets will a bank be able and willing to roll over or
renew?
• what is the expected level of new loan requests that will be accepted?
• what is the expected level of draw-downs of commitments to lend that a bank will need
to fund? These commitments may take the form of committed commercial lines without
material adverse change (MAC) clauses, which a bank may not be legally able to turn
away even if the borrower's financial condition has deteriorated; committed commercial
lines with MAC clauses which some customers could draw down in crisis scenarios;
and other commercial and consumer credit lines.In estimating its normal funding needs, some banks use historical patterns of roll-overs, draw-
downs and new requests for loans; others conduct a statistical analysis taking account of seasonal
and other effects believed to determine loan demand (e.g., for consumer loans). Alternatively, a
bank may make judgmental business projections, or undertake a customer-by-customer
assessment for its larger customers and apply historical relationships to the remainder.
                Roll-overs, draw-downs and new loan requests all represent potential cash drains for a
bank. Nevertheless, a bank has some leeway to control many of these items depending on the
assumed scenario. In a crisis situation, for example, a bank might decide to risk damaging some
business relationships by refusing to roll over loans that it would make under normal conditions,
or it might refuse to honour lending commitments that are not binding.
                In determining the marketability of assets, the approach segregates the assets into three
categories by their degree of relative liquidity:
• the most liquid category includes components such as cash, securities, and interbank
loans. Some of these assets may be immediately convertible into cash at prevailing
market values under almost any scenario (either by outright sale, or for sale and
repurchase, or as collateral for secured financing), while others, such as interbank loans
or some securities, may lose liquidity in a general crisis;
• a less liquid category comprises a bank's saleable loan portfolio. The task here is to
develop assumptions about a reasonable schedule for the disposal of a bank's assets.
Some assets, while marketable, may be viewed as unsaleable within the time frame of the
liquidity analysis;
• the least liquid category includes essentially unmarketable assets such as loans not
capable of being readily sold, bank premises and investments in subsidiaries, as well as,
possibly, severely troubled credits;
• assets pledged to third parties are deducted from each category.
                The view underlying the classification process is that different banks could assign the
same asset to different categories on the maturity ladder because of differences in their internal
asset-liability management. For example, a loan categorised by one bank as a moderately liquid
asset - saleable only late in the liquidity analysis time-frame - may be considered a candidate for
fairly quick and certain liquidation at a bank that operates in a market where loans are frequently
transferred, that routinely includes loan-sale clauses in all loan documentation and that has
developed a network of customers with whom it has concluded loan-purchase agreements.
                In categorising assets, a bank would also have to decide how an asset's liquidity would
be affected under different scenarios. Some assets that may be very liquid during times of normal
business conditions may be less so during a time of crisis. Consequently, a bank may place an
asset in different categories depending on the type of scenario it is forecasting.
(b) Liabilities
               To evaluate the cash flows arising from a bank's liabilities, a bank would first examine
the behaviour of its liabilities under normal business conditions. This would include establishing:• the normal level of roll-overs of deposits and other liabilities;
• the effective maturity of deposits with non-contractual maturities, such as demand
deposits and many types of savings accounts;
• the normal growth in new deposit accounts.
               As in assessing roll-overs and new requests for loans, a bank could use several possible
techniques to establish the effective maturities of its liabilities, such as using historical patterns of
deposit behaviour. For sight deposits, whether of individuals or businesses, many banks conduct a
statistical analysis that takes account of seasonal factors, interest rate sensitivities, and other
macroeconomic factors. For some large wholesale depositors, a bank may undertake a customer-
by-customer assessment of the probability of roll-over.
               In examining the cash flows arising from a bank's liabilities in the two crisis scenarios, a
bank would examine four basic questions:
• which sources of funding are likely to stay with a bank under any circumstance, and can
these be increased?
• Which sources of funding can be expected to run off gradually if problems arise and at
what rate? Is deposit pricing a means of controlling the rate of runoff?
• which maturing liabilities or liabilities with non-contractual maturities can be expected
to run off immediately at the first sign of trouble? Are there liabilities with early
withdrawal options that are likely to be exercised?
• does the bank have back-up facilities that it can draw down?
               The first two categories represent cash-flow developments that tend to reduce the cash
outflows projected directly from contractual maturities. In addition to the liabilities identified
above, a bank's capital and term liabilities not maturing within the horizon of the liquidity analysis
provide a liquidity buffer.
               The liabilities that make up the first category may be thought to stay with a bank even
under a "worst-case" projection. Some core deposits generally stay with a bank because retail and
small business depositors may rely on the public-sector safety net to shield them from loss, or
because the cost of switching banks, especially for some business services such as transactions
accounts, is prohibitive in the very short run.
               The second category, liabilities that are likely to stay with a bank during periods of mild
difficulties and to run off relatively slowly in a crisis, includes core deposits that are not already
included in the first category. In addition to core deposits, in some countries, some level of
particular types of interbank and government funding may remain with a bank during such
periods, although interbank and government deposits are often viewed as volatile. A bank's own
liability roll-over experience as well as the experiences of other troubled institutions should help in
developing a timetable for these cash flows.               The third category comprises the remainder of the maturing liabilities, including some
without contractual maturities, such as wholesale deposits. Under each scenario, this approach
adopts a conservative stance and assumes that these remaining liabilities are repaid at the earliest
possible maturity, especially in crisis scenarios, because such money may flow to government
securities and other safe havens. Factors such as diversification and relationship building are seen
as especially important in evaluating the extent of liability run-off and a bank's capacity to replace
funds. Nevertheless, in a general market crisis, some high-quality institutions may find that they
receive larger-than-usual wholesale deposit inflows, even as funding inflows dry up for other
market participants.
               Some banks, for example, smaller banks in regional markets, may also have credit lines
that they can draw down to offset cash outflows. While these sorts of facility are somewhat rare
among larger banks, the possible use of such lines could be addressed with a bank's liability
assumptions. Where such facilities are subject to material adverse change clauses, of course they
may be of limited value, especially in a bank specific crisis.
(c) Off-balance-sheet activities
               A bank should also examine the potential for substantial cash flows from its off-balance-
sheet activities (other than the loan commitments already considered), even if such cash flows are
not always a part of banks' current liquidity analysis.
               Contingent liabilities, such as letters of credit and financial guarantees, represent
potentially significant cash drains for a bank, but are usually not dependent on a bank's condition.
A bank may be able to ascertain a "normal" level of cash outflows on an ongoing concern basis,
and then estimate the scope for an increase in these flows during periods of stress. However, a
general market crisis may trigger a substantial increase in the amount of draw-downs of letters of
credit because of an increase in defaults and bankruptcies in the market.
               Other potential sources of cash outflows include swaps, written over-the-counter (OTC)
options, and other interest rate and forward foreign exchange rate contracts. If a bank has a
large swap book, for example, then it would want to consider the circumstances under which the
bank could become a net payer, and whether or not the potential net payout is significant. For
example, if a bank is a swap market-maker, the possibility exists that in a bank-specific or general
market crisis, customers with in-the-money swaps (or a net in-the-money swap position) would
seek to reduce their credit exposure to the bank by asking the bank to buy back swaps. Similarly,
a bank would need to review its written OTC options book and any outstanding warrants, together
with any hedges against these positions, since certain types of crises may stimulate an increase in
early exercises (for American-style options) or requests that the bank repurchase options. These
exercises and repurchase requests could result in an unforeseen cash drain, if hedges either cannot
be quickly liquidated to generate cash or provide insufficient cash.
(d) Other assumptions
               The discussion has centred so far on assumptions concerning the behaviour of specific
instruments under various scenarios. Looking solely at instruments, however, may ignore some
factors that may significantly impact a bank's cash flows.
               Besides the liquidity needs arising from business activities, banks also require excess
funds to support other operations. For example, many large banks provide clearing services tocorrespondent banks and financial institutions that generate significant and not always easily
predictable cash inflows and outflows, the amounts of which depend on the clearing volumes of
the correspondent banks. Unforeseen fluctuations in these volumes can deplete a bank of needed
funds.
               Net overhead expenses, such as rent and salary, although generally not significant
enough to be considered in banks' liquidity analyses, can in some cases also be sources of cash
outflows.
B. Managing market access
       Some liquidity management techniques are viewed as important not only for their influence
on the assumptions used in constructing the maturity ladders, but also for their direct contribution
to enhancing a bank's liquidity. Thus, it is important for a bank to review periodically its efforts to
maintain the diversification of liabilities, to establish relationships with liability-holders and to
develop asset-sales markets.
       As a check for adequate diversification of liabilities, a bank needs to examine the level of
reliance on individual funding sources, by instrument type, nature of the provider of finds, and
geographic market. In addition, a bank should strive to understand and evaluate the use of
intercompany financing for its individual business offices.
       Building strong relationships with some providers of funding can provide a line of defence in
a liquidity problem and form an integral part of a bank's liquidity management. The frequency of
contact and the frequency of use of a funding source are two possible indicators of the strength of
a funding relationship.
       Developing markets for asset sales or exploring arrangements under which a bank can
borrow against assets is the third element of managing market access. The inclusion of loan-sale
clauses in loan documentation and the frequency of use of some asset-sales markets are two
possible indicators of a bank's ability to execute asset sales under adverse scenarios.
C. Contingency planning
       A bank's ability to withstand a net funding requirement in a bank specific or general market
liquidity crisis can also depend on the calibre of its formal contingency plans. Effective
contingency plans should address two major questions:
• does management have a strategy for handling a crisis?
• does management have procedures in place for accessing cash in emergency?
The degree to which a bank has addressed these questions realistically, provides management
with additional insight as to how a bank may fare in a crisis.(i) Strategy
              A game plan for dealing with a crisis should consist of several components. Most
important are those that involve managerial coordination. A contingency plan needs to spell out
procedures to ensure that information flows remain timely and uninterrupted, and that the
information flows provide senior management with the precise information it needs in order to
make quick decisions. A clear  division of responsibility must be set out so that all personnel
understand what is expected of them during a crisis. Confusion in this area can waste resources
on certain issues and omit coverage on others.
               Another major element in the plan should be a strategy for taking certain actions to alter
asset and liability behaviours. While assumptions can be made as to how an asset or liability will
behave under certain conditions (as discussed above), a bank may have the ability to change these
characteristics. For example, a bank may conclude that it will suffer a liquidity deficit in a crisis
based on its assumptions regarding the amount of future cash inflows from saleable assets and
outflows from deposit run-offs. During such a crisis however, a bank may be able to market
assets more aggressively, or sell assets that it would not have sold under normal conditions and
thus augment its cash inflows from asset sales. Alternatively, it may try to reduce cash outflows
by raising its deposit rates to retain deposits that might otherwise have moved elsewhere.
               Other components of the game plan involve maintaining customer relationships with
borrowers, trading and off-balance-sheet counterparties, and liability-holders. As the intensity of a
crisis increases, banks must often trade off relationships with some customers for liquidity in
order to survive. By classifying borrowers and trading customers according to their importance to
the bank, a bank can determine which relationships it may need to forgo at different points in a
crisis. At the same time, relationships with lenders become more important in a crisis. If a bank's
strategy requires liability managers to maintain strong ongoing links with lenders and large
liability-holders during periods of relative calm, the bank will be better positioned to secure
sources of funds during emergencies.
               An additional, pragmatic element that may be important is how a bank deals with the
press and broadcast media. Astute public relations management can help a bank avoid the spread
of public rumours that can result in significant run-offs by retail depositors and institutional
investors.
(ii) Back-up liquidity
               Contingency plans should also include procedures for making up cash flow shortfalls in
emergency situations. Banks have available to them several sources of such funds, including
previously unused credit facilities and the domestic central bank. Depending on the severity of a
crisis, a bank may choose - or be forced - to use one or more of these sources. The plan should
spell out as clearly as possible the amount of funds a bank has available from these sources, and
under what scenarios a bank could use them.
Table 1
The maturity ladder based on contractual maturities
DAY 1:Cash Inflows Cash Outflows Excess/(Shortfall)
Maturing liabilities with
contractual
Maturing assets 100 maturities 50
Interest receivable 20 Interest payable 10
Asset sales 50 Other deposit runoffs 30
Drawdowns on Com. Lines 10 Drawdowns on Com. Lines 10
Total 180 Total 140 40
DAY 2:
Cash Inflows Cash Outflows Excess/(Shortfall)
Maturing liabilities with
contractual
Maturing assets 100 maturities 70
Interest receivable 25 Interest payable 20
Asset sales 55 Other deposit runoffs 40
Drawdowns on Com. Lines 10 Drawdowns on Com. Lines 50
Total 190 Total 180 10
DAY 3-DAY 15:
Cash Inflows Cash Outflows Excess/(Shortfall)
Maturing liabilities with
contractual
Maturing assets 130 maturities 90
Interest receivable 50 Interest payable 30
Asset sales 60 Other deposit runoffs 40
Drawdowns on Com. Lines 20 Drawdowns on Com. Lines 60
Total 260 Total 220 40
DAY 16-DAY 30:
Cash Inflows Cash Outflows Excess/(Shortfall)
Maturing liabilities with
contractual
Maturing assets 160 maturities 130
Interest receivable 80 Interest payable 60
Asset sales 90 Other deposit runoffs 80
Drawdowns on Com. Lines 40 Drawdowns on Com. Lines 80
Total 370 Total 350 20
Table 2
Day 1 of the maturity ladder under alternative scenarios
Cash inflows Normal business Institution-specific General market
conditions crisis crisis
(1) (3) (2)
Maturing assets 100 100 90
Interest receivable 20 20 10Asset sales 50 60 0
Drawdowns 10 0 5
Total 180 180 105
Cash outflows
Maturing liabilities 50 50 50
Interest payable 10 10 10
Deposit runoffs 30 100 60
Drawdowns on lending 50 60 75
commitments
Total 140 220 195
Liquidity Excess/(Shortfall) 40 (40) (90)