` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
July 28, 1998 
RBI Governor meets bank employees' associations 
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today met the representatives of all 
India employees' associations. The meeting was arranged in response to a request 
made on behalf of all India bank employees' associations. The meeting was attended by:  
Name of Representative Name of Association 
Shri T.Chakraborti, Gen.Secretary All India Bank Employees 
Association (AIBEA) 
Shri N. Sampath, Secretary -do- 
Shri Shanta Raju, President All India Bank Officers 
Confederation (AIBOC) 
Shri S.R.Sengupta, Gen.Secretary -do- 
Shri S.R.Bal, Secretary Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI) 
Shri S.Bardhan, Gen. Secretary -do- 
Shri P.K.Menon, President All India Bank Officers Association (AIBOA) 
Shri K.K.Nair, Gen. Secretary Indian National Bank Officers' Congress(INBOC) 
Shri Shantakumar -do- 
Shri R.P.K.Murugesan, Gen. Secretary, Indian National Employees Federation (INBEF) 
Bank 
Shri S.Sawant, Dy.Gen.Secretary -do- 
Shri S. Balasubramaniam National Confederation of Bank Employees (NCBE) 
Shri P.Laxminarasiah, Gen.Secretary -do- 
Shri B.V.Indurkar, Gen.Secretary National Organisation of Bank Workers (NOBW) 
Shri S.N.Joshi, Gen.Secretary National Organisation of Bank Officers (NOBO)  
Shri Ravi Raman -do- 
Shri S P Talwar and Shri Jagdish Capoor, both Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank 
attended the meeting.  Welcoming the representatives of the all India employees' associations, Governor Dr. 
Bimal Jalan expressed his high appreciation of the visit paid by the national level leaders 
of bank employees to the Reserve Bank. The visit assumed significance as its main 
objective was exchange of views on issues concerning the future of the banking and 
financial sector.  
In his introductory remarks, the Governor stated that the Indian banking sector had an 
important role to play in a changing global environment. He added that the banking 
sector in India is expected to make significant contribution to India's economic growth 
and in increasing employment opportunities. It also plays an important in making India's 
external sector strong. The Governor emphasised that the Indian banking sector would 
be strong and vibrant only if the management, officers and the staff of the banks made 
joint efforts towards achieving this objective. He appreciated the cooperation extended 
by all sections of the staff in the banking industry in keeping the industrial scenario 
purposeful and constructive. He was confident that this tradition will continue in the years 
to come.  
Stating that the Indian banking industry had many achieve ments to its credit, the 
Governor specifically referred to the extension of banking services to the poorest 
through widening of its branch network. He then drew the attention of the associations 
that some areas in which the banking industry could do more were customer service and 
information technology. He said that banks needed to expeditiously reduce the 
transaction time and costs in order to improve their service and efficiency.  
The representatives of the all India employees' associations reiterated their cooperation 
for the future growth of the banking industry so as to ensure the country's development. 
The representatives, however, expressed their concerns about some of the views 
detailed in the Narasimham Committee on Banking Sector Reforms.  
In this connection, they reiterated their views expressed in their memorandum to the 
Government of India that some of the structural recommendations were not in the 
interest of the bank ing industry. They reaffirmed their strong support for public sector 
banks remaining in the public sector and said that unions were not in favour of reducing 
government holding in public sector banks to 33 per cent as recommended by the 
Narasimham Committee. With regard to weak banks, it was pointed out that several of 
these banks provided important services in different parts of the country and any 
narrowing of their functions will not be in the country's interest.  
The asset reconstruction fund which was suggested by the Narasimham Committee, 
according to the representatives of the employees' associations, was, among other 
things, fraught with moral hazard. There was also a discussion of the legal and other 
measures needed to effect quick recovery of loans and reducing non-performing assets 
of the banks. A view was expressed that this can only be done if banks have the power 
of attaching the property and defaulting borrowers are penalised effectively. It was also 
suggested that the Reserve Bank should publish the information on defaulting borrowers 
even if court cases have not been filed. Among other matters which came up for 
discussion were:the need for providing suitable safeguards to banking personnel 
involved in decision making, pros and cons of induction of new technology in the banking 
services and the need to strengthen management-employee cooperation and 
consultations at the industry level.   
The Governor noted the valuable suggestions made by the associations and assured 
that the Reserve Bank would take them fully into account while formulating its own views 
with regard to the future growth of the banking industry.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1998-99/125  
 