October 30, 1998
Credit Policy for 1998-99
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, today announced “
Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for 1998-99” covering a mid-term review of
macro-economic and monetary developments in 1998-99 besides setting out the stance of
monetary policy for the second half of 1998-99. He also outlined measures to carry
As announced earlier, in April 1998, no changes have been made in short-term
measures like the Bank Rate, cash reserve ratio and Repo rate as part of this policy. These
measures will, however, continue to be subject to change at short notice in the light of
At present, there is some uncertainty about the extent of likely increase in
agricultural production during the year as some parts of the country have been affected by
floods and late rains. Taking this factor into account, a rate of growth of 3 per cent in
this point of time, pending further confirmation about the effect of late rains. As regards
industrial growth, although there are some incipient signs of recovery, it is not yet clear
whether the rate of growth in industrial output will be substantially higher than last year’s
growth of 6.5 per cent. Allowing for the turnaround in agriculture and some recovery in
industrial production, at present the best estimate for GDP growth for 1998-99 is the
region of 6 per cent (as compared with 5.1 per cent in 1997-98). In view of the global
slow-down in economic activity, this order of growth will place India as one of the very
few countries, developed or developing, which will show a relatively high positive rate of
The Governor mentioned that the rate of inflation, currently ruling at over 8 per
cent, was significantly higher. So far the increase in the rate of inflation is concentrated in
a few primary commodities, particularly fruits and vegetables and edible oils. Expressing
the hope that with the arrival of the new crop and the beginning of the period of seasonal
decline in prices, the annual rate of inflation could decelerate in the next few months, he
added that recent trends in inflation were a matter of concern, and there could be no room
The Governor mentioned that the higher rate of growth of 10.1 per cent in money
supply (M3) during the current financial year upto October 9, 1998 as compared with 7.3
per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year was partly due to inflows of
receipts on account of Resurgent India Bonds ( ). The strong growth in money supply
was reflective of the sharp increase in aggregate deposits in particular time deposits of
There was a substantial increase in food credit extended by scheduled commercial
banks. Food credit has expanded by Rs.3 ,464 crore (upto October 9, 1998) as against
Rs.1,455 crore in the corresponding period of last year, reflecting in part the increase in
food procurement operations and the build-up of buffer stocks of foodgrains. Non-food
credit has also shown a substantial increase during the current year. Most of the increase
credit to the commercial sector by scheduled commercial banks was of the order of
,972 crore (2.2 per cent) in the current financial year upto October 9, 1998 as against
Rs.4,686 crore (1.7 per cent) in the corresponding period of last year. The total resources
Rs.6
has taken place in the last two fortnights (upto October 9, 1998). The increase in non-food
scheduled commercial banks.
RIBs
for complacency.
growth during the current year.
agricultural production over the depressed level of 1997-98 seems a reasonable estimate at
Domestic Developments
actual domestic and external sector developments.
forward the monetary and financial sector reforms.
Mid-Term
Mid-Term Review of Monetary andflow to commercial sector including banks’ investments in shares and debentures, capital
issues, borrowings from financial institutions, etc., have shown a sharper increase.
Scheduled commercial banks’ investments in commercial paper, shares, debentures, etc.,
,787 crore in the current financial year so far as compared with Rs.8,506
of resources from the scheduled commercial banks to the commercial sector went up by
,759 crore (4.6 per cent) compared with Rs.13,192 crore (4.5 per cent) in the
capital issues, GDRs and borrowings from financial institutions was much higher at
Rs.41,792 crore upto October 9, 1998 as against Rs.34,645 crore in the corresponding
The Governor men tioned that gross market borrowing requirement of the Central
Government estimated for 1998-99 accounted for a substantial portion of the incremental
deposits in the banking system. In order to minimise the impact of such high borrowing
on June 11, that it will take private placements and then release securities to the market
market borrowing was completed by October 29, 1998 with only a modest increase in the
yields of medium to long-term securities. Governor welcomed Government’s firm
intention to contain the fiscal deficit and its borrowing requirements, to the levels
announced in the Budget for 1998-99, and stressed that significant reduction in fiscal
 The period since the April monetary and credit policy was announced has
presented major challenges for management of the external sector. The East Asian
economic crisis, which appeared to be coming under control during the earlier part of the
year, continues to remain serious. The contagion spread to Russia in August and could
affect some Latin American countries as well. The economic outlook in Japan appears
uncertain. Equity, bond and forex markets in the united States and Europe has also been
affected. Although there has been some upward movement in global stock markets in the
past fortnight, the world economy, as whole, continues to be faced with considerable
uncertainty. In addition to the unfavourable external situation, India was also confronted
with certain other developments after the Pokhran test. Among these developments were
the economic sanctions imposed by certain industrial countries, the suspension of fresh
multilateral lending (except for some sectors), the downgrade by rating agencies, and the
Viewed against the above background, developments in respect of India’s foreign
exchange market have been orderly and generally satisfactory. A major positive
development has been the success of the Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs) floated by the
under the RIB scheme. India’s present foreign currency assets are higher than at the
beginning of January 1998 in both gross and net terms (i.e., after excluding forward
liabilities). Considering the unfavourable international environment, this is a matter of
some satisfaction. The level of reserves also substantially exceeds the total stock of short-
term debt and portfolio flows. As a matter of cautious policy, India has kept its short-term
Governor drew attention to the reduction in interest rates on export credit and to
1999. On June 11, 1998, the Reserve Bank had advised banks to charge a spread of not
percentage points over LIBOR prior to this date). Such foreign currency loans can be
more than 1.5 percentage points over LIBOR on foreign currency loans (as against 2.0/2.5
the corresponding reduction in refinance rate. This concession is effective upto end-March
as well as forward liabilities at a low level in relation to the size of its reserves.
State Bank of India. Foreign currency resources amounting to US $ 4.2 billion were raised
reduction in net investment of foreign institutional investors.
External Developments
deficit over the next 2-3 years should be a high national priority.
gradually and he added that this approach has worked reasonable well. A major part of the
requirements on the interest rate outlook, Governor recalled the Reserve Bank’s indication
period of last year.
corresponding period of 1997-98. The total resources flow to commercial sector including
Rs.15
crore in the comparable period of last year. Together with such investments, the total flow
increased by Rs.8serviced out of foreign currency export receipts. Exporters are advised to make maximum
In order to create an exporter-friendly environment, the Reserve Bank will be
setting up a Working Group of bankers to study the procedures and working of the credit
delivery system for exports including those in respect of foreign currency loans and to
make suggestions for reducing the repetitive documentation requirements and to improve
the quality of non-fund based services to exporters. The objective would be to make
basis of performance with minimum paper work, and provide related services efficiently.
The Working Group will also review the operation of the EEFC scheme with a view to
October 1998 – March 1999
Dwelling on the stance of monetary policy for the second half of 1998-99 the
Governor said that at the present juncture RBI faced a monetary policy dilemma as
reflected in the need to reduce monetary expansion while at the same time nurturing real
view of high growth in money supply, he felt that nothing should be done to dampen
change in the CRR or interest rates. RBI will continue to manage liquidity through Open
Market Operations and repo operations and with the policy of flexible use of interest rate
Drawing attention to the strength of the ba nking sector, the Governor mentioned
that as a part of economic reforms, since the early nineties, the capital adequacy and other
prudential norms of banks have been strengthened and currently are close to the
international standards. The quality and standards of supervision have also been upgraded
substantially under the direction of a separate Board for Financial Supervision under the
aegis of the Reserve Bank of India. Barring the performance of a selected few weak
banks, whose problems are being addressed separately, the improvement in the banking
sector as a whole is impressive. In terms of inherent robustness, it is well recognised that
the Indian banking system’s exposure to real estate or shares is negligible, while open
foreign currency exposure limits are severely restricted. 
are also very small due to regulatory restrictions and a relatively large part of banking
system’s assets are in secure investments particularly in Government and approved
securities. These features of the Indian banking system are important strengths and
 
In consultation with the Government of India, the Reserve Bank has finalised its
views on a large number of specific recommendations made by the Committee. In
implementing the recommendations, the Reserve Banks recognised the immediate
resource management problems of banks and, therefore, decided to phase them
• The minimum capital to risk asset ratio is being raised from the existing 8 per
• Income recognition and provisioning norms on Government guaranteed
advances are being brought on par with those on other advances from 2000-
cent to 9 per cent from the year ending March 31, 2000.
over a period of time. Some of the important decisions are as follows:
Narasimham Committee II (i)
contribute to their long-term financial viability.
Their off-balance sheet liabilities
Monetary and Financial Sector Reforms
instruments to signal its stance.
emerging signs of incipient recovery in the real sector. For the time being, there will be no
growth. While a case could be made out for monetary tightening at the present juncture, in
Stance of Monetary Policy for
removing procedural problems.
available export credit “on line”, including foreign currency loans mentioned above, on the
any procedural hassles.
use of this facility. Banks are also requested to make this facility easily accessible without2001.
• Investments in Central/State Government securities or in securities guaranteed
by them have hitherto been assigned zero risk weight. Provisioning
requirements are being introduced for standard assets from March 31, 2000,
and the time frame for categorising an advance as doubtful debt is being
shortened with the provisioning norms to be achieved in two phases during
2000-2001 and 2001-2002.
• With effect from the year ending March 31, 2000, Government/approved
securities will carry a risk weight of 2.5 per cent. An additional risk weight of
20 per cent on investments in the government guaranteed securities of
Government undertakings which do not form part of the market borrowing
programme is being introduced with effect from the financial year 2000-2001.
In respect of the outstanding stock of such securities in the portfolio as on
March 31, 2000, banks will implement this decision in two phases of 10 per
• The risk weight for Government guaranteed advances which go into default is
• 
to phase them in a manner that reduces the risk exposures of banks, strengthens financial
 
While investments in bonds/securities of some of the Public Financial Institutions
statutes governing them, investments in bonds/debentures of certain other PFIs carry 100
per cent risk weight as the relevant Act/Statute does not confer the status of an `Approved
Security’. With a view to removing this anomaly, risk weights on investments in
bonds/debentures of PFIs as defined under Section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (and
• It has also been decided that henceforth investments by banks in bonds or debentures
of a corporate guaranteed by a PFI will be treated as an exposure by banks on the PFI
and not on the corporate as is the practice at present. Consequently, for the purpose of
calculation of exposure norms, the exposure of the bank on the PFI guaranteeing the
bond or debenture issued by corporates will be 100 per cent, whereas the exposure by
the PFI on the corporate will be to the extent of 50 per cent.
• In case of advances guaranteed by the Government, non payment of guaranteed
(iii) Payment and Settlement System
In order to bring about operational efficiency, speed , better accuracy and
system, the Reserve Bank has gone in for a reliable communication backbone through the
establishment of VSAT- network which will be expanded in phases and over time, to
move towards real time gross settlement (RTGS) system. The Reserve Bank has already
instituted a Payment System Group (PSG) and a VSAT user Group to deal with issues
encompass the entire financial sector. This network would also help to design a strategy to
timeliness of payment transactions as also to contain financial risk in the national payments
amount or a default in interest/principal would now attract risk weights.
certain other FIs notified by RBI) are being given a uniform risk weight of 20 per cent.
(PFIs) carry zero risk weight due to their status as `Approved Securities’ under the special
Securities of Public Financial Institutions
Risk Weights and Exposure Norms on (i)
soundness and contributes to improved profitability outlook.
In implementing the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee, care has been taken  
from March 31, 1999.
Foreign exchange open positions will carry 100 per cent risk weight with effect
being introduced from March 31, 2000.
cent each in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003.Money Market
 
• 
market and term money market should be strictly restricted to banks and primary
dealers and aims to ultimately move towards a pure inter-bank market including
primary dealers. This will be implemented in a manner that the existing lenders in the
market will have operational flexibility to adjust their asset-liability structure.
Simultaneously, measures will be taken to widen the repo market and improve non-
• The RBI also agrees with the Committee’s suggestion that there must be clearly
• The RBI broadly agrees with the Committee’s suggestion that the RBI support to the
market should be through a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF). It has been decided
to initiate actions that will enable, in due course, to replace the present general
refinance facility with LAF. 
margin is also being considered to facilitate smooth operation of payment and
Repo withdrawn
 It has been decided to withdraw the restriction of the minimum period of 3 days
Interest Rate Swaps to be introduced
 With a view to enabling money market participants to hedge ag ainst interest rate risk
arising out of asset-liability mismatches, it has been decided, in principle, to create an
consultation with market participants, relevant aspects such as standard documentation,
The Government securiti es market constitutes the principal segment of the debt
market and serves as the benchmark for pricing corporate papers of varying maturities. It
auctions. Besides, the following recent initiatives for developing the Government
• The move towards repeal of the Public Debt Act, 1944 and its replacement by the
• The proposed changes in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 which will
pave way for a more active repos market and introduction of new market features like
when issued trading.
Government Securities Act.
securities market are required to be implemented.
Bill is proposed to introduce a uniform price auction method in respect of 91 day Treasury 
 
Government Securities Market  
and prudential prescriptions before allowing the product in the market.
the back-up by underlying transactions between parties, the bench-mark rate and maturity,
environment that would facilitate introduction of interest rate swaps. RBI will examine, in
 
 
for inter-bank ready-forward (repo) transactions effective from October 31, 1998.
 
Minimum period for  
settlement system.
Collateralised intra-day/over-night facility with adequate
defined prudent limits for banks’ reliance on the money market.
bank participation in a variety of their instruments.
The Reserve Bank concurs, in principle, with the Committee that the call/notice money
II relating to money market.
e RBI took a view on some specific suggestions by the Narasimham Committee Th
of a high level National Payments Council which will be set up soon.
relating to RTGS system. The Reserve Bank will take major initiatives under the guidanceRegulation of Non-banking
)
Pursuant to the amendment to the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 by Parliament,
RBI had instituted a comprehensive regulatory framework for NBFCs in January 1998.
The Governor mentioned that the appropriate regulation of NBFCs is a complex task in
view of the large number of NBFCs which are spread all over the country. The
appropriate regulation of NBFCs is a complex task in view of the large number of 
which are spread all over the country. NBFCs perform an important financing role in the
economy particularly in respect of small scale and decentralised sector and provide
important employment and entrepreneurial opportunities at the ground level. However,
prevalence of unethical financial practices as well as lack of transparency in operations
have also been marked in the case of some sections of the NBFC sector. These have
resulted in widespread complaints from depositors about their functioning. Taking into
account both the positive as well as the negative aspects of the NBFC sector, RBI and
Government have been open to suggestions and advice from experts and market
The Government had set up a Task Force to make further recommendations for
effective regulation of the NBFC sector. The proposals of the Task Force are now under
may be required to give effect to Task Force recommendations become available. Until
then, NBFCs are advised to strictly adhere to the current regulations in force. An
are fully aware of the prescribed ceiling on interest rates, disclosure requirements,
Of banks and Financial Institutions
financial institutions, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had, in December 1997, set up a
Working Group comprising Chairmen of some commercial banks and development
financial institutions under the Chairmanship of Shri S.H.Khan, the then Chairman of the
Industrial Development Bank of India. The Group submitted its full report in May, 1998.
under preparation, which would contain Reserve Bank’s views on the Working Group’s
recommendations/suggestions. This paper will be circulated for discussion shortly. The
final decision on the issues raised in this paper will be taken in the light of the
Release : 1998-99/545 Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
suggestions/comments received on it.
As announced in the April Monetary and Credit Policy Statement, a “Discussion Paper” is
In order to deliberate on issues relating to harmonising the operations of banks and
Discussion Paper on Operations
unsecured nature of deposits and other features of NBFC operations.
investors’ information programme is also being carried out by RBI to ensure that investors
framework as soon as decisions of the Government, including any legislative changes that
consideration of the Government and RBI will make appropriate changes in the regulatory
mechanism for smaller NBFCs, and improve operational effectiveness.
participants to further refine the regulatory framework for NBFCs, develop self-regulatory
NBFCs
NBFCs Financial Companies (