` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
June 24,1998 
Working Group on Money Supply submits its Report to RBI Governor 
 
The Working Group on `Money Supply : Analytics and Methodology of Compilation' submitted its report to the 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India yesterday. The Working Group was set up under the chairmanship of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, 
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in December last year to re-examine the analytical aspects of monetary 
survey in the light of the changing dimensions and depth of financial sector consequential to the implementation of 
financial sector reforms.  
The Working Group also comprised : Dr. A. Vasudevan, Vice Chairman, Prof. Ganti Subrahmanyam, Member, Prof. 
Romar Correa, Member, Dr. B.K Bhoi, Member and Shri Deepak Mohanty, Member Secretary.  
The Working Group examined the analytical aspects of monetary survey in the light of the changing dimensions of the 
financial sector consequent to the implementation of financial sector reforms in India. The Working Group has made a 
number of suggestions to strengthen the statistical system in order to enlarge the coverage of financial statistics 
beyond the traditional confines of the banking sector. Accordingly, the Working Group has proposed compilation of 
comprehensive analytical surveys of the Reserve Bank of India, commercial and cooperative banks and the organised 
financial sector at regular intervals. The Working Group has also proposed compilation of four monetary aggregates, 
three liquidity aggregates and comprehensive measures of credit aggregates to effectively capture the dynamics of the 
monetary and financial system. The conceptual framework of the Report is in consonance with various country 
practices.  
Major highlights of the Report are:  
There is no unique definition of `money', either as a concept in economic theory or as measured in practice. Money is a 
means of payment and is thus a lubricant that facilitates exchange. Money also acts as a store of value and a unit of 
account. In the real world, however, money provides monetary services along with tangible remuneration. It is for this 
reason, money has to have relationship with the activities that economic entities pursue. Money can, therefore, be 
defined for policy purposes as the set of liquid financial assets, the variation in the stock of which could impact on 
aggregate economic activity. As a statistical concept, money could include certain liquid liabilities of a particular set of 
financial intermediaries or other issuers.  
On review of the monetary aggregates now being published, the Group has recognised that from among the four 
measures of money, M1 and M3 are the two measures which are extensively used both for policy purposes and in 
academic exercises. Use of data on M2 and M4 are conspicuous by their near-absence. As between M1 and M3, the 
latter captures the balance sheet of the banking sector, the institutional category which has been the focus of the policy.  
The Group is of the view that the present set of monetary aggregates is not in conformity with the largely followed norm 
of progressivity in terms of liquidity. Moreover, the treatment of postal deposits as monetary aggregate may not be in 
harmony with the notion of `depository corporation', since the postal department is a part of general government. It was 
felt that as part of financial innovations, while financial institutions may issue financial assets closely resembling bank 
deposits, it may not be appropriate to treat them as monetary assets unless the institutions provide services similar to 
those of the banks. In fact, many countries have dealt with this issue by constructing measures broader than `broad 
money' (sometimes called very broad money, or extended money supply, or liquidity and denoted by `L', M2+, M3 
extended or M3E, MCT, ALP, etc.). Liquidity measures generally include instruments that are considered to be good 
substitutes for broad money, or include a range of instruments that may be empirically related to overall economic 
activity or prices. Such instruments, which compete with broader monetary aggregates could, therefore, be treated as 
part of liquidity measures. Thus, the Group has sought to differentiate monetary aggregates from other financial 
aggregates not so much on the basis of the attributes of the instruments themselves as on the nature and functioning of 
institutions issuing such instruments.  While the Group was of the opinion that the consolidated account of the banking sector might be considered for 
compilation of monetary aggregates, it has proposed that the items of liabilities of non-banking financial institutions 
which are predominantly held with the public and which compete with broad money aggregates might be included in 
various measures of liquidity. One such item is postal office deposits on which monthly data are available albeit with 
some time lag. There are, however, other instruments which could be included in the broad measure of liquidity: (i) 
public deposits and certificates of deposit of financial institutions as these liabilities directly compete with the liabilities of 
the banking sector and (ii) those liabilities of non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) such as public deposits (a 
component of regulated deposits) which are competitive to deposits with commercial banks and bypass the process of 
bank intermediation. Some countries even include commercial papers and treasury bills under the broad liquidity 
measure. In the Indian context, however, these two instruments are predominantly held by banks and financial 
institutions and hence should not form a part of liquidity of the non-financial non-government sector, the Group has 
noted. Accordingly, the Group has recommended compilation of four measures of monetary aggregates, and three 
measures of liquidity aggregates besides a comprehensive financial sector survey box:  
Recommended Measures of Financial Aggregates  
A. Monetary Aggregates
Weekly Compilation
M0 = Currency in Circulation + bankers' deposits with the RBI + `Other' Deposits with the RBI (including Primary 
dealers' balances)  
Fortnightly Compilation
M1 = Currency with the Public + Demand Deposits with the Banking System + `Other' Deposits with the RBI = Currency 
with the Public + Current Deposits with the Banking System + Demand Liabilities Portion of Savings Deposits with the 
Banking System + `Other' Deposits with the RBI  
M2 = M1 + Time Liabilities Portion of Savings Deposits with the Banking System + Certificates of Deposit issued by 
Banks + Term Deposits of residents with a contractual maturity of up to and including one year with the Banking 
System = Currency with the Public + Current Deposits with the Banking System + Savings Deposits with the Banking 
System + Certificates of Deposits issued by Banks + Term Deposits of residents with a contractual maturity up to and 
including one year with the Banking System + `Other' Deposits with the RBI.  
M3 = M2 + Term Deposits of residents with a contractual maturity of over one year with the Banking System + Call 
borrowings from `Non-Depository' financial corporation by the Banking System.  
B. Liquidity Aggregates
Monthly compilation
L1 = M3 + all Deposits with the Post Office Savings Banks (excluding National Savings Certificates)
L2 = L1 + Fixed Deposits with Development Financial Institutions + Certificates of Deposit issued by Development 
Financial Institutions
Quarterly Compilation 
L3 = L2 + Public Deposits of Non-Banking Financial Companies  
C. Financial Sector Survey (FSS) = Aggregate Assets and Liabilities of the Financial Corporations  
M0 is essentially the monetary base, compiled from the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank of India; M1 purely reflects 
the non-interest bearing monetary liabilities of the banking sector, M2 includes besides currency, and current deposits, 
saving and short-term deposits reflecting the transactions balances of entities. M3 has been redefined to reflect 
additionally to M2 the call fundings that the banking system obtains from other financial institutions.  
Bank credit is often specifically referred to in several writings in monetary economics, as a critical variable affecting 
consumption and capital formation in a direct manner. As such it is often regarded as a more useful indicator of real 
sector activity than money supply. In India, one of the objectives of monetary policy is clearly stated in official 
documents as one of ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy. But as changes in 
bank credit are treated as impacting wholly on money supply in the absence of a movement in foreign exchange 
assets, credit aggregates were hitherto not considered as important. This situation, however, may not continue for long 
in view of growing openness of the economy. Hence there is a clear need for having comprehensive measures of 
credit. At present while credit to government from the banking system is clearly identified, bank credit to the commercial 
sector, in the conventional sense, includes only advances in the form of loans, cash credit, overdrafts, bills purchased 
and discounted and investments in approved securities other than government securities. However, commercial banks 
have in recent years been investing in securities such as commercial paper, shares and debentures issued by the 
commercial sector which are not reflected in the conventional credit aggregates. The Group, therefore, proposes to 
broaden the definition of bank credit to the commercial sector by including all these investments in the conventional 
credit aggregates. Another major problem in the present reporting system has been that there is no estimate of credit flow from the entire financial system either to the government or the commercial sector. The Group proposes to 
address this lacunae by recommending preparation of a comprehensive financial sector survey on a quarterly basis 
which would throw up estimates of credit from the financial sector to (i) government and (ii) non-financial commercial 
sector.  
In India, an increasing volume of purchases is being made on credit cards. The Group, therefore, debated on the 
treatment of transactions undertaken through credit/debit cards. Insofar as credit card purchases and the elimination of 
physical bank cheques merely provide more convenient and efficient means of transferring demand deposits, they do 
not call for any redefinition of the money stock - although they may lead to a higher velocity of circulation. Contingent 
instruments, such as lines of credit on credit cards, are not financial assets and are not recorded in monetary and 
financial data, regardless of whether they are electronic in nature or not. Similarly, debit cards which use remote 
terminals to debit user's deposit account and immediately credit vendors' accounts does not necessitate a redefinition 
of monetary aggregates as the transaction serves the same function as cheque, but the transfer is immediate.  
Several new technologies are under development to make payments via computer chips, through computer networks, 
or across the worldwide Internet. It has been suggested that electronic equivalents will be developed for all major 
payments methods; currency, cheques, debit cards, credit cards, and travelers' cheques. For example, electronic 
currency issued by commercial banks appears to have characteristics of a private currency that can compete with the 
official national currency. These may develop rapidly and have a variety of as yet undetermined, but possibly large, 
effects on monetary and financial system. The Group has stated that if these systems establish themselves, new 
statistical definitions, classification systems and reporting procedures may be needed.  
Derivatives have grown enormously in recent years in many industrial countries and have made a noticeable presence 
in some of the major emerging economies with increasing participation by banks. In India, as market trading in 
derivatives is yet to be introduced and transactions in derivatives are privately arranged, these are treated as off-
balance sheet items. The Group is of the view that derivatives may not have any immediate significance in the 
compilation of monetary aggregates. Developments in the area of derivatives should however be periodically monitored 
as monetary transmission mechanisms may be affected if large volumes of derivatives hedge a variety of market 
exposures.  
Apart from the compilation of monetary survey and broader liquidity aggregates, the Group has proposed the 
compilation of a comprehensive financial sector survey (FSS) to capture the dynamic interlinkages between the 
`depository corporations' and the rest of the organised financial sector.  
The Group has also proposed that to begin with, data on selected items of liabilities and assets can be collected from 
about 150 large non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) having public deposits of Rs.20 crore or above which 
account for over 90 per cent of the total public deposits of all NBFCs on a quarterly basis. This could be subsequently 
improved upon.  
In view of the proposed changes in the reporting format, monetary data would need to be more detailed, based on the 
information furnished by banks. Moreover, with the enlargement of the scope and coverage of the Section 42(2) 
returns, data on such items as certificates of deposit (CDs) issued by banks, external liabilities of banks and banks' 
investment in `other securities' would now be available to the public at a higher frequency.  
The Group has proposed that the present practice of compiling monetary base on a weekly basis and monetary 
aggregates on a fortnightly basis should continue. Data on reserve money and monetary aggregates should be 
published in the Weekly Statistical Supplement and in other publications of the Reserve Bank, as has been the present 
practice, and should also be placed on the RBI Website.  
The Group has recommended that measures of liquidity L1 and L2 should, however, be compiled on a monthly basis 
and published in the RBI Bulletin. It is proposed to publish data on L3 and financial sector survey report on a quarterly 
basis in the RBI Bulletin. The financial sector survey may be accompanied by a review of the developments in the 
financial sector during the quarter under reference, to bring to the fore the dynamic interlinkages in the financial sector 
which could be useful in providing important policy inputs.  
At present, monetary data are available on the Internet in the RBI Website as part of the weekly statistical supplement 
and other reports. The Group has recommended that monetary data should continue to be disseminated through 
various publications of the Reserve Bank as well as in electronic form.  
In view of the change in the reporting format prescribed particularly for the commercial and co-operative banks, 
financial institutions and mutual funds, the Group has proposed that a structured calendar for each data category might 
be set in place for smooth transition to the new system of reporting as given in the following Table:  
Schedule for Collection of Statistics  Sl. Sector Revised Reporting to start 
No. from  
1. Reserve Bank of India October 1998  
2. Scheduled Commercial First Reporting Friday of 
Banks October 1998  
3. Co-operative Banks October 1998/First Reporting 
Friday of October 1998  
4. Non-Bank Financial October 1998  
Companies 
5. All categories of Quarter ended October 1998  
Financial Institutions 
Based on the data available from July 1998, it should be possible to publish new official series of monetary aggregates 
from early 1999.  
The Group has proposed that both the existing and proposed monetary aggregates may initially be published for at 
least a year in the relevant Reserve Bank publications in order to facilitate an understanding of the elements underlying 
the shift to the proposed aggregates.  
In order to ascertain whether money as defined is demanded in relation to the overall transactions in the economy, it 
would be necessary to relate the chosen monetary aggregate to some macroeconomic indicator such as GDP or GNP. 
The real broad money balances and aggregate income were found to be cointegrated reflecting a long-run equilibrium 
relationship between real broad money (M3) and real GDP. However, in order for the broad money demand equation to 
be adequately used for policy purposes, the stability properties are very critical. The tests for predictive stability showed 
that there has been an unidirectional short-term deviation from the long-run equilibrium path which needs to be 
captured in terms of other relevant variables to ensure predictive accuracy. This would also mean that monetary policy 
exclusively based on the demand function for money could lack precision. Therefore, an appropriate framework of 
examining this issue could be to study the dynamic stability of an error correction model (ECM) rather than the original 
structural equation. However, availability of only annual data on GDP and the short period for which the data on other 
related variables are available following the reforms of the financial sector posed serious difficulties for empirical 
estimation of a robust ECM model.  
In order to evaluate the performance of the new monetary aggregates proposed by the Group, an exercise of 
estimating the three monetary aggregates (M1, M2 and M3) and two liquidity aggregates (L1 and L2) was undertaken 
on a monthly basis for the period April 1994 to March 1997. The information content of these new aggregates favoured 
M2 to both M1 and M3 reflecting that M2 has the potential of emerging as an important aggregate which could be 
useful for policy purposes.  
In the light of the incipient empirical evidence, the Group felt that the positive impact of the financial sector reforms 
notwithstanding, several imperfections still persist in various segments of the financial system as financial sector 
reforms are incomplete. Financial markets, particularly the long-term segments, are not fully integrated with the rest of 
the financial sector. Forex market has begun to show some enlargement over years but is yet to acquire sufficient 
depth as to bear serious consequence for policy formulation. The level of integration between domestic and overseas 
markets as a result, has been somewhat limited. Unless financial sector reforms are furthered and capital movement 
liberalisation is improved, complete integration of financial markets will be impaired. It is against this transitional setting 
that the monetary policy framework needs to be viewed and operating procedures appropriate to the institutional 
circumstance are put in place.  
The Reserve Bank of India has set up an inter-departmental group to coordinate the implementation of the Report of 
the Working Group.  
The Report of the Working Group would be published on the RBI Website (URL http://www.rbi.org.in) on July 3, 1998. 
On the same day, the Report will be published as a supplement to the July 1998 RBI Bulletin.  
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/1250 