` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
July 01,1998 
Summary of Major Recommendations 
The summary of other major recommendations of the Committee are:  
o In the post liberalisation era SIDBI finds it difficult to cross subsidise its credit to SSI sector. Primary Lending 
Institutions seek refinance from SIDBI at a rate which is below the average cost of funds of SIDBI. This calls for 
SIDBI managing resources at low cost such as increase in its equity capital, floatation of tax free bonds by it, 
placement by Government with it special dispensation funds, increased allocation of NIC (LTO) Fund of RBI and 
Government providing exchange risk cover for SIDBI against its external commercial borrowing.  
o LIC/GIC and Pension Funds should lend a portion of their funds to SIDBI for on lending to SSI.  
o SIDBI should be accorded the same role and status as the nodal/co-ordinating agency for financing of small 
industries as is now available to NABARD in the field of agricultural development.  
o SIDBI may consider launching industry specific Venture Funds. It may set up immediately a few Software Venture 
Capital Funds in collaboration with Software Professionals Associations or their expert bodies and examine those 
for food processing and industry related export services.  
o The Market Development Assistance Fund of SIDBI has not really taken off. SIDBI may review the scheme with the 
help of a committee of SSI entrepreneurs who are exposed to marketing in a competitive environment. The 
assistance from the fund should be made available to companies for marketing their products directly or to set up 
innovate marketing systems like Amway and Avon.  
o A new fund called the `Reconstruction Fund' may be set up in SIDBI and initiative thereof be taken by 
Government/RBI. Initial corpus should also be provided by Government/RBI. This should be linked with all the 
Public Sector Banks through appropriate lines of credit.  
o Branch Managers should be delegated powers to grant ad hoc facilities to the extent of 20 per cent of the limits 
sanctioned. The Managers could also draw upon `Reconstruction Fund' to provide margin money to the extent the 
borrower is not able to provide for the additional facilities made available. If there is a shortfall even after the 
provision of this additional margin money from the Reconstruction Fund, the banks should permit borrowers to 
make good the shortfall over a period of time out of the future profits of the units.  
o At least 40 per cent of the resources of SIDBI should be ear marked for tiny sector enterprises having investment in 
plant and machinery upto Rs.5 lakh. It can either take up such units itself or can refinance the loans granted to such 
units.  
o Government may expedite enactment a new Company Law incorpo rating a Chapter on co-operative companies 
which could be looked after by the Registrar of Companies. Government may also explore to promote Urban Co-
operative Banks under the Central Multi State Co-operative Societies Act which could be suitably amended to 
provide for more self regulation and autonomy.  
o Some specific recommendations made by Khan Committee regarding restructuring of weaker SFCs may be taken 
up for prompt decision by the Union Government. SIDBI should be helped through provision of funds etc. to take up 
a plan for financial restructuring of these bodies. State Governments because of their poor financial position may 
not be able to fund the restructuring of SFCs. State Governments share should either be substituted and provided 
by SIDBI or by the Government of India.  
o Funds for lending under Single Window Scheme by SFCs should be placed by SIDBI with the SFCs in adequate 
measures. Alternatively, SIDBI should receive proposals from SFCs to do the lending itself directly in such cases till 
the health, particularly of weak SFCs, is restored.  o Each SFC should get into an MOU with one or two Public Sector Banks and participate in joint lending in which 
both term loan and working capital is provided jointly. For example, 80 per cent of the term loan could be given by 
SFC and 20 per cent by bank. In the case of working capital which may be sanctioned at the same time as the term 
loan, the proportion could be reversed, i.e. 80 per cent by bank and 20 per cent by SFC. However, the working 
capital account could be managed and supervised by the bank through its specialised SSI branches.  
o SIDBI should sign MOUs with the State Governments to provide some assistance to SFCs prior to the approval of 
assistance packages by the Government of India/SIDBI. In return for such funding, State Government could either 
agree to the appointment of an experienced banker as Managing Director of the Corporation or agree to provide a 
panel of its officers with the right kind of background and experience and SIDBI could select one of them for 
appointment as Managing Director for a minimum term of 3-5 years.  
o A reliable agency, in private sector or joint sector, should be promoted to help small entrepreneurs in the 
preparation of Project Profiles and other papers. Industry and trade associations in different states and districts 
should take initiative in this regard. CII and WASME should design software packages for assisting entrepreneurs 
in filling up application forms and other dealings with the banks. IBA should get copied and made available to each 
branch specially specialised SSI branches.  
o RBI should review the application forms and ensure that super fluous items, if any, are deleted.  
o The application form prescribed for facilities upto Rs.2 lakh could straightaway be permitted to be used for facilitate 
upto Rs.10 lakh and that prescribed for facilities upto Rs.15 lakh for such facilities upto Rs.50 lakh. Similarly, the 
form for limits upto Rs.1 crore could be prescribed for facilities beyond Rs.50.00 lakh and upto Rs.2 crore. The 
fourth category of proforma could be used by any SSI unit requiring facilities beyond Rs.2 crore.  
o Banks should open more specialised SSI branches or shift/ restructure some of their existing branches and convert 
them into specialised branches for financing the small scale sector. The banking sector within the next two years 
should ensure collectively that at least one such branch is opened in every district of the country, particularly at 
those centres where the number of small units is at least 100. These branches should be opened by strong banks 
only. The committee is confident that the number of specialised and profit making branches can easily increase by 
1,000 within the next three years.  
o The banks should ensure that specialised SSI branches entertain loan proposals from the tiny sector and village 
industries units unhesitatingly. Each such branch may look after upto 200 units, out of which a minimum of 150 
should be from the tiny sector with loans less than Rs.10.00 lakh. This ratio should preferably be maintained in 
case the number of such units at a branch is less than 200.  
o Selective specialised branches should be encouraged to innovate and experiment with new products such as 
factoring services and business credit cards.  
o Steps should be taken to open new SSI branches for servicing particular industry in a big cluster. These specialised 
branches should be managed by competent staff and should be properly equipped with computer and 
communication lines. A beginning should be made by opening such branches for electronics and software 
industries.  
o The Committee was informed that one field officer in a spe cialised branch is able to handle about 50 SSI units. The 
number of field officers should be sufficient to take care of number of accounts entertained by a branch. Properly 
trained and prefer ably technically oriented direct recruits in adequate number should be posted in specialised SSI 
branches.  
o Further delegation of sanctioning powers should be made in respect of specialised SSI branches in particular and 
other branches in general for prompt disposal of applications.  
o Specialised SSI branches should be linked to national and international data banks and information centres 
including internet to enable them to provide latest information to their clients.  
o The limit of composite loans should be enhanced to Rs.5.00 lakh so that the entire requirement of such units is met 
by single documentation and security and charge creation process. This facility should also be extended to all SSI 
units requiring loans upto Rs.5.00 lakh irrespective of their location.   
o Only banks should entertain projects both for term loans and working capital of borrowers with loan requirement, 
upto and inclusive of Rs.5.00 lakh. Only one organisation, either SFC or a bank may sanction both the term loan 
and working capital for projects requiring institutional credit for more than Rs.5.00 lakh and upto and inclusive of 
Rs.25.00 lakh. For Projects having loan requirement in excess of Rs.25 lakh, arrangements should be made by 
SIDBI with the Public Sector Banks to have an MOU signed between the SFC and selected Public Sector Banks 
active in different regions of the country for joint financing, whereby both the term loan as well as working capital 
should be shared alongwith sharing of securities on pari passu basis. However, the borrowers in this category who 
want to avail such facilities from a single agency i.e. bank or SFC, should be allowed to exercise their option.  
o The scope of leasing, hire-purchase and equipment finance should be expanded and obstacles removed including 
legal hurdles. Financing institutions should be advised to have a flexible approach in fixing margins for financing of 
DG sets, modernisation or technology upgradation or equipment required for pollution control or obtaining quality 
markings under International Standards Organisation (ISO) programmes. Banks/SFCs may consider utilising the 
funds available from the National Equity Fund to be treated as margin.  
o Reserve Bank of India should have dialogue with the State Governments and the Central Government regarding 
delays in providing subsidies for financing the projects of SSI units. The State Governments may be well advised to 
discontinue schemes of subsidies if their financial strength does not warrant bearing this burden. However, where 
there are temporary financial problems, RBI should advise banks to consider providing bridge loans to cover the 
amount of subsidy. The State Governments should agree to bear the interest cost on such bridge loans.  
o There should be at least one Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) in each State and their functioning be smoothened by 
providing adequate support staff for expediting recovery of bank loans above Rs.10 lakh.  
o Regarding loans below Rs.10 lakh, the State Government should provide all facilities and assistance for the 
recovery of these loans. Special revenue courts should be set up in each state to deal with SSI cases. The State 
Government should also get in touch with the respective High Courts and get a few Civil Courts (one at every 
district headquarters with proper infrastructure) designated as Recovery of Bank Dues Courts. These courts should 
deal with loan recovery matters in a summary manner. Government can also examine treating such loans on the 
pattern of agricultural loans upto Rs.10 lakh as Government dues and recover as arrears of land revenue. The bank 
should take advantage of the Lok Adalats to settle dues upto Rs.10 lakh. The banks should appoint special officers 
or designate existing officers having aptitude for work relating to recovery, who should exclusively deal with 
recovery.  
o The definition of sick SSI unit may be changed to read as under : (a) If any one of the borrowal accounts of the unit 
remains sub-standard for six months i.e. principal or interest in respect of any of its borrowal accounts has 
remained overdue for a period exceeding one year, (b) There is erosion in the net worth due to accumulated losses 
to the extent of minimum 50% of peak net worth during the previous accounting year, and(c) the unit has been in 
commercial production for at least three years.  
o SLIICs should be converted into Statutory Bodies under a special Statue and given adequate statutory and 
administrative powers to enforce their decisions on bankers and financial institutions and other agencies concerned 
with the rehabilitation of potentially viable SSI units.  
o To encourage banks to take up rehabilitation of potentially viable sick SSIs some relaxation in Income Recognition 
and Asset Classification norms should be provided. A period of one year both for the additional exposure as well as 
old outstanding advances, to such SSI units should be permitted and these facilities treated as standard advanced 
for a period of one year whereafter the classification should be changed depending upon the record of recovery.  
o SSI should get a special treatment in the matter of interest rates. In view of their contribution to the economy, they 
should normally get credit at PLR.  
o The overall interest payable by SSI should remain within the existing parameters fixed by RBI i.e. maximum of PLR 
plus four per cent. The PLR should take care of the cost of funds incurred by the banks. Additional spreads over the 
PLR will be used as premium for guaranteeing the repayment of the loan. Naturally, SSI units, with good track 
record will have to pay lower premium and can derive some advantage out of lower spreads.   
o The existing Credit Guarantee Scheme being operated by DICGC should be scrapped and be replaced by some 
more objective and suitable scheme to be operated by a corporation. Reserve Bank of India should take initiative 
for its set up by SIDBI. The proposed corporation should cover only those loans which are sanctioned by Public 
Sector Banks/financial institutions and where principal amount sanctioned does not exceed Rs.10.00 lakh. The 
coverage for the purpose of guarantee will be limited to 80% of the amount in default. Depending upon the 
experience gained over a period of time, the scheme can be extended to loans with higher credit limits.  
o The proposed Credit Corporation should have a strong corpus of at least Rs.500 crore which can be contributed by 
SIDBI, NABARD, Government of India, State Governments and banks. The proposed Corporation may appoint 
either selected bankers as their agents or the Corporation can set up its own offices in different States for extending 
such guarantees. The premium under the Scheme would also be decided by the agents subject to a maximum of 4 
per cent points depending upon the risk perception.  
o Unlike DICGC, option to have guarantee cover or not in individual accounts should rest with the banks. On a 
reciprocal basis, acceptance or not of a borrower for extending guarantee cover shall be at the discretion of the 
Guarantee Corporation. Simultaneously or as an alternative, the banks can set up special funds for meeting losses 
arising on account of defaults of repayments in SSI loan accounts. RBI should take up the matter suitably with the 
Government of India to ensure that necessary amendments are carried out in related Tax Laws to enable the banks 
to set up such funds and provide effective in-house guarantee for loans granted by them.  
o Reserve Bank of India should initiate appropriate policy measures for phasing out the system of collateral 
securities. Greater emphasis may be laid on the viability of the project and the management of the enterprises 
rather than on collateral security.  
o A revised floor level of Rs.2.00 lakh for exemption of borrowal accounts from obtention of collateral securities is 
recommended as against the existing level of Rs.25,000/-. In respect of other accounts, the collateral security 
including third party guarantee should be in relation to the risk undertaken. The Committee also suggests that for 
loans upto Rs.10.00 lakh, the value of collateral security or the net means of third party guarantee should not be 
more than 50% of the fund and non-fund based exposure of the bank/financing institution. Beyond loans of 
Rs.10.00 lakh, the banks may exercise their commercial judgement in determining the level of collateral or third 
party guarantee. However, in no case a bank should obtain a collateral security or third party guarantee which is in 
excess of the loan amount. Reserve Bank of India may also prescribe that at least 10% of the SSI loans sanctioned 
by a bank branch should be without collateral guarantees.  
o The Committee proposes the setting up of a collateral Reserve Fund with an initial corpus of Rs. 100 crore to be 
contributed by Government of India, SIDBI, NABARD, State Governments and banks with a view to providing 
support to first generation entrepre neurs who find it very difficult to furnish collateral securities or 3rd party 
guarantees. The support from this fund will be limited to projects costing upto Rs. 10.00 lakh. However, they, i.e. 
entrepreneurs will have to contribute to this fund by paying some token amount of interest in addition to the PLR to 
avail of this assistance.  
o Consequent upon revision in the definition of SSI the 40% allocation for units having investment in plant and 
machinery upto Rs. 5.00 lakh may continue. However, the allocation of 20% for units having investment between 
Rs. 5.00 lakh and Rs. 25 lakh should be raised to 30%. The balance 30% may be given to the units with investment 
in plant and machinery between Rs. 25-60/75 lakh.  
o The commercial banks should not be permitted to utilise funds earmarked for direct priority sector lending for:(i) 
Subscription to bonds issued by NABARD with the object of financing exclusive ly agriculture/allied activities as well 
as non-farm sector(ii) Subscription to bonds floated by SIDBI, SFCs/SIDCs and NSIC exclusively for financing SSI 
units.  
o (iii) Subscription to bonds issued by NHB & HUDCO.  
o It would be appropriate to assess the flow of credit to SSI by using data on disbursement rather than `outstanding 
balances'. The Committee feels that it is possible for banks to achieve a growth rate of 30% p.a. in disbursement 
terms and accordingly, the banks should be advised to fix their disbursement targets alongwith outstanding 
balances. Reserve Bank may also advise the banks to pay more attention to the backward states such as Bihar, 
J&K, M.P. and North Eastern States while fixing the lending targets and seek progress in this behalf separately.   
o Reserve Bank of India may consider, in consultation with Government of India, the need to set up a Small 
Industries In frastructure Development Fund for developing industrial areas in/around metropolitan cities, urban and 
semi-urban areas which are not covered by RIDF of NABARD. To start with, a corpus of such fund say Rs.1,000 
crore be kept with SIDBI for lending to the State Governments.  
o The banks have been directed to ensure that not less than 25 per cent of total credit purchases are through the bills 
drawn by the seller so as to develop bills culture. RBI may examine the possibility of increasing this percentage to 
50 per cent in the next year depending on the experience gained during the current year.  
o Public Sector bodies/corporates/individuals/firms which delay payments to SSI beyond 90 days should not be 
allowed to deduct any expenditure relating to such supplies made by SSI units and adjust it against income. 
Section 43(b) of the Income Tax Act should be amended accordingly.  
o Venture Capital funding has not been successful in India. The Committee is of the view that the policy framework 
should encourage Venture Capital particularly for SSI sector. The policy measures required for popularising this 
concept should be got examined and decided. A separate legislation be enacted to promote the growth of venture 
capital in the country.  
o The mechanism of `Factoring' should be got studied afresh by an expert Committee with a view to expand the 
scope and reach of these services to be followed by enacting a new law, if necessary, so as to remove legal 
impediments relating to stamp duty, registration fee, assignment of contracts etc.  
o Every bank should be asked to earmark a part of its credit for setting up SSI units established by women 
entrepreneurs. Separate schemes could also be framed to promote women enterprises by the banks in consultation 
with Government Ministries and departments engaged in developing programmes and enterprises for women.  
o Funds available under the existing schemes for promoting employment in the Government and Semi-Government 
agencies for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes should be 
profitably and gainfully employed in taking up risk positions in new ventures set up by weaker sections, particularly 
those belonging to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. SIDBI could examine the possibility of setting up a 
separate Venture Capital Fund for promoting such enterprises. States also could be advised to set up such venture 
capital funds in one of their existing corporations for promoting these categories.  
o The aspect of training for the bankers particularly those posted in new SSI branches has to be adequately focussed 
at the highest level in the bank. The training programmes should at tempt to prepare the managers for meeting the 
challenges in volved in dealing with this vital and demanding sector.  
o Banks may be advised to improve their system of promotion and reward to calibrate the same to the individual 
performance, not only in matters of deposits and house keeping but also in respect of granting loans, particularly to 
SSI. If required, the Annual Confidential Report Forms and procedures should be modified to provide for the above. 
Banks should give due importance to loaning activities for assessing the performance of individual manager. While 
judging the performance of a Manager/Officer in case of specialised SSI branches this should rank as the most 
important criteria. A Balanced Score Card can be introduced in our banking system.  
o Cases involving amounts upto Rs. 25 lakh should be dealt with by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the bank instead of 
referring it to the Central Vigilance Commission.  
o With a view to redress customers grievances, time limits and systems prevalent in banks should be made as 
transparent as possible and well publicised.  
o The procedures for making complaints should be simple and as informal as possible.  
o Each Public Sector Bank should appoint an Ombudsman who should be a person of high integrity and inclined to 
do public service. He can look after the credit related grievances of the borrowers which are outside the scope of 
Banking Ombudsman Scheme. In addition to having only one Ombudsman, banks can have a Commissioner of 
Grievances in each zone who should look after on a rough basis about 500 branches. Eminent retired citizens 
having adequate background of banking/industry/business may be appointed as Commissioners. The Governor, 
RBI may appoint each such Ombudsman or Commissioner on the recommendations of the bank concerned.  
o It is recommended that the Small Scale Companies who wish to have overseas presence should be allowed to 
invest upto US $ Twenty thousand based on a simple procedure and the banks should assist them for this purpose. 
This will help SSI units to in crease exports and upgrade technology.  