` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Apr 21,1998 
R.V. Gupta Panel on Agricultural Credit recommends Far-reaching Changes 
Fixing targets for agricultural loans on the basis of `flow' of credit as against `outstandings', making a comprehensive 
assessment of the credit needs of an agricultural borrower and extending a composite cash credit limit which is 
reckoned as agricultural credit under the priority sector, permitting banks to fix interest rates on agriculture loans of all 
amounts along with freedom to offer finer rates to those borrowers who have good recovery record and to those who 
opt for a savings module linked to the loan product, delegating powers to branch level so that at least 90 per cent of 
loan applications are disposed off at the branch level, addressing a host of HRD related issues with regard to bank 
officials posted at rural branches and review and rationalisation of forms and returns to be filled up in the case of 
agricultural loans are some of the highlights of the recommendations made by the high level one-man committee on 
agricultural credit. The high level one-man committee of Shri R.V. Gupta submitted its report to Dr. Bimal Jalan, 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India today. The Report will be examined by the Reserve Bank of India. The Report has 
also been forwarded to the Government of India.  
The one-man Commtitee was set up by the Reserve Bank of India in December 1997 in context of the priority accorded 
to agriculture and also to give an impetus to the flow of credit to this sector. The main task of the Committee was to 
suggest measures for improving the delivery systems and simplification of procedures for agricultural credit. The 
Committee's overall mandate was to ascertain the constraints faced by commercial banks in increasing the flow of 
credit, introducing new products and services and simplifying the procedures and methods of working with a view to 
enabling rural borrowers to access adequate and timely credit from the commercial banking system. For this purpose, 
the Committee was asked to visit select branches and regional offices of commercial banks, get a feedback from 
agriculturists, farmer-borrowers, agricultural scientists, extension workers, etc., as well as field level staff.  
The details of some of the major recommendations are:  
Summary of Recommendations  
1. The agreements and other covenants/documents to be completed are complicated and simplification is 
recommended as has been done by some banks, such as the State Bank of India. All banks may examine 
their systems and make modifications within two months and report compliance to the Reserve Bank of India.  
2. The focus of credit appraisal should be an evaluation of the income stream of the borrower and a 
comprehensive assessment of credit needs taking into account track record, credibility, capability, as well as 
technical viability of the proposal.  
3. To ensure quick disposal, at least 90 per cent of loan applications should be decided at the branch level. 
Banks may, therefore, review the position and suitably modify the powers of sanction delegated to the branch 
manager.  
4. Short term credit needs of the farmer should include all requirements directly and indirectly related to 
production, post harvest and household expenses. Repayment capacity should be assessed on the basis of 
aggregate household income from all sources including crop production and ancillary activities. The credit 
facility should be extended through a composite cash credit limit. The limit may initially be provided for one 
year but over time extended for a longer period and brought to credit atleast once a year. On credit balances 
banks would pay interest, and charge interest on the oustandings. Advances under such limits may be 
`reckoned' as advances to agriculture within the definition of priority sector.  
5. In line with the change in approach towards appraisal of loan proposals for lending recommended by the 
Committee, the forms accompanying the main application, especially, for investment credit should be 
simplified and made more relevant for focussing on the income stream of the farmer. It is recommended that 
the Reserve Bank of India may appoint an expert group to finalise the new forms.  6. While some minor investments of a medium term nature can be taken into account in the composite cash 
credit limit, investments of a major nature would still need a separate loan. In relation to the systems followed 
for term lending, the emphasis should be on whether in a given area an activity can be supported profitably, 
rather than obtaining abstract cash flows and other data based on projected technical parameters.  
7. During cash rich periods, farmers have a propensity to invest in gold, land, implements, livestock or incur 
expenditure of a consumption nature. As a result they are vulnerable during times of adverse price 
fluctuations and natural calamities. To address the issue, farmers should be offered a liquid savings product 
with an appropriate return which should be inbuilt in the loan product so as to provide them a cushion during 
lean periods.  
8. The system of adoption of scales of finance for short term loans and unit cost of investment credit has led to 
distortions at the base level and introduced an element of rigidity in assessment of credit requirements. In 
view of the expertise developed by banks in financing agricultural operations, and in order to give them 
flexibility to take care of variations in the requirements of borrowers, the fixing of the scale of finance/unit cost 
may be decided by the concerned banks.  
9. The system of disbursing agricultural loans, partly in cash and partly in kind has restricted borrower's choice 
and given rise to undesirable practices including submission of false bills and receipts. In order to foster an 
environment of trust, banks may disburse loans for agricultural activities on a cash basis only and discontinue 
the practice of obtaining bills/receipts of inputs/assets purchased.  
10. Where banks are conversant with the track record of the borrowers, obtaining a no due certificate should be 
left to the discretion of the lending bankers.  
11. Without recovery at acceptable levels, lending cannot be sustained. Specific recommendations made be the 
Committee towards improving recoveries in agricultural lendings include requesting State Governments to set 
apart dedicated teams for recovery, improving the recovery climate through rurally oriented field publicity 
campaigns projecting the message that banks are willing to lend to viable borrowers, and unless funds are 
recycled lasting relationships cannot be forged through the credit mechanism. The accounting systems in 
banks need to focus on systems by which recovery is disaggregated by loan products, as well as by time so 
that it is possible for managers to determine which products are more viable and whether current recoveries 
are better than past dues.  
12. Apart from these steps, the Committee has recommended that tangible incentives be provided to farmers 
who are prompt in repayment. Banks should design appropriate incentive systems including interest benefit 
or rebate to borrowers who repay their dues promptly. Farmers who opt for a savings module linked to the 
loan product, may also be given a finer rate both on the loan as well as on the savings product.  
13. Taking into account the procedural difficulties and the high cost of stamp duty connected with registering a 
mortgage in favour of a bank, State Governments may initiate steps to abolish stamp duty on mortgage of 
agricultural land for obtaining loans from banks.  
14. Unlike in urban areas, most land in rural areas is inherited and there are no title deeds. The original land 
records in the tehsil office are similar to a share depository. The bank should, therefore, accept the pass book 
with an authenticated record of a farmer's land holding as valid title for purposes of an equitable mortgage.  
15. In States where the Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions (Banks) Acts have been 
passed, bank loans should be secured through the mechanism of the declarations prescribed under this Act. 
States which have not passed this legislation may consider doing so and in the interim states may issue 
administrative orders that declarations made by borrowers on the Talwar Committee model for charging their 
lands to banks may be noted in the revenue records so that banks can lend against the same.  
16. The value of security taken should be commensurate with the size of the loan and the tendency to ask for 
additional collateral by way of guarantors where the land has already been mortgaged should be 
discouraged.  
17. In order to give operational flexibility to the lending bankers, margin, security and collateral requirements 
should be left to the discretion of the lending banker for loans over Rs.10,000.  
18. The requirement to insure all assets purchased through bank loans is an imposition causing financial 
hardship to borrowers. The decision as to the kind of insurance to be taken should be left to the borrowers 
subject to statutory requirements.  19. Bank branches should inform farmers transparently of the facilities availed as also the amount and periodicity 
of the various fees and charges levied by banks.  
20. The internal supervision system of banks should provide for visits to a few service area villages and during 
such visits, inspecting officer should convene open meetings of farmers to assess their problems and 
difficulties. The chairmen and managing director of banks should also pay surprise visits once every month.  
21. There is an urgent need to rationalise the number of returns and a detailed exercise should immediately be 
undertaken by banks to reduce unnecessary paper work including elimination of ad hoc returns which very 
often require data already provided elsewhere.  
22. To address the problem of low morale of the rural cadre in commercial banks uneven commitment and the 
weak sense of mission, the Committee has recommended doing away with the Government stipulation for a 
compulsory rural posting and making it institutional need based to be decided by the management of banks. 
It has also suggested that to bring about the desired behavioural change in rural lending and to strengthen 
the sense of mission of bank staff, a package of incentives encompassing foreign exposure, training in 
prestigious institutions within the country, weightage in promotion, posting to centre of choice, improvement 
in accommodation and educational facilities and corporate recognition of outstanding performance are 
recommended. The Committee has also recommended revamping of performance appraisal system and 
appropriate changes in training programmes.  
23. The non farm sector has a large unutilised credit absorptive capacity. Rural households generally pursue a 
number of activities, both agricultural and non agricultural, for supplementing their cash flow. These activities 
have modest working capital requirements and banks should design specific loan products for such activities 
by providing loans for short period up to three months, initially with weekly or fortnightly repayments. At the 
end of the period repeat loans for higher amounts and for longer periods could be offered depending on the 
repayment behaviour with inbuilt incentives by way of interest rebate on prompt payment.  
24. Self Help Groups have proved effective intermediaries for the transmission of bank loans. Banks should give 
wide publicity to their preference for financing SHGs, sentisize regional heads and branch managers to the 
potential for good lending through this route, and provide training to branch managers in assessing the 
potential of SHGs and simplification of documents.  
25. Timeliness and adequacy of credit are critical to increasing the credit flow to agriculture. Small loans involve 
higher transaction and administrative costs. As a result, managers tend to look for larger loans where interest 
rates are deregulated, while banks seek to equalise the price differential by cross subsidisation. In effect, 
therefore, regulated rates of interest operate as a barrier to the sanction of small loans. As has already been 
done in the case of cooperatives and RRBs, commercial banks should be free to fix the rates of interest for 
loans of all amounts.  
26. In the implementation of subsidy linked credit schemes, emphasis usually was on achievement of targets and 
the quality of lending as well as impact of such schemes was very poor. A thorough review of existing 
systems is recommended as subsidy linked lending has proved unsuccessful and needs to be replaced by an 
alternative method. The Committee believes that the rural poor are viable and borrowers can be directly 
targetted by commercial banks through NGO/SHG intermediation coupled with extended micro credit working 
capital facilities to the non farm sector.  
27. Banks should prepare Special Agricultural Credit Plans (SACPs), the objective of which should be to 
accelerate the flow as well as to substantially improve the quality of lending. The RBI may indicate annually 
the expected increase in the flow of credit over the previous year rather than fixing a target based on 
outstanding credit. Once the system is in place the 18 per cent target would cease to have much relevance.  
28. There should be a substantial modification of the Service Area Approach (SAA) so as to provide borrowers a 
choice of banks as well as bankers a larger area of operation. The responsibility of a particular branch for the 
credit requirements for a specific village should, however, continue.  
29. A review of Land Tenancy Acts may be undertaken so as to permit renting of land without the owner losing 
property rights.  
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/991  
 