1. Reserve Bank of India (RBI) put in place a new regulatory framework in January 1998 for
non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) providing therein, inter alia, for mandatory
linkage of the quantum of public deposits to the level of credit rating. Reserve Bank also
instituted a strong supervisory mechanism to monitor the compliance of the regulations and
2. The Government and the RBI received representations from the NBFCs , their associations
and the all India trade bodies, that the small and medium NBFCs engaged in equipment
rating in order to increase the availability of resources to large sized NBFCs, more
3. Government of India appointed a Task Force on NBFCs under the Chairmanship of Shri
C.M. Vasudev, Special Secretary (Banking), where Reserve Bank of India was also
represented, to examine the above issues besides the adequacy of the present legislative
framework, to suggest improvements in the procedure for dealing with the customer
complaints, and for involving the State Governments in regulating the NBFCs and
unincorporated bodies. The recommendations of the Task Force have been accepted by the
4. It is proposed to give effect to the recommendations as early as possible. While certain
recommendations having a bearing on the deposit acceptance norms vis-a-vis the stipulation
of the credit rating are being implemented with immediate effect, other recommendations
requiring statutory amendments to the RBI Act, 1934 will be processed for necessary action
in due course. Some of the recommendations such as increasing the entry level Net Owned
Fund of Rs. 25 lakh, increasing the liquid asset requirement from 15 percent to 25 percent,
the NBFCs and unincorporated bodies are advised to comply with all the existing directions
5. Reserve Bank of India today announced modifications in the deposit acceptance norms for
NBFCs and unincorporated bodies with immediate effect. The following significant
modifications in the existing Directions on acceptance of public deposits and prudential
Non-Banking Financial Companies
norms have been announced.
directions/regulations.
and regulations till necessary modifications are made in the relative provisions of statute and
prudential norms, etc. will be implemented over a period of time in phases. In the meanwhile,
investment of 25 percent of the reserve fund in marketable securities, revision of some of the
Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India.
particularly, the equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies.
rating. They also requested for doing away with the linkage of deposit quantum with the credit
leasing and hire purchase finance activities should be exempted from the requirement of credit
to ensure that these companies function on sound and healthy lines.
requirement of minimum investment grade credit rating for acceptance of public deposits and
and unincorporated bodies
changes in deposit norms for NBFCs
Reserve Bank announces(1) 
Below Rs 25 lakhs with or
Rs 25 lakh and above Public deposits not
exceeding 1.5 times of
NOF or public deposit upto
Rs 10 crore whichever is
less provided the company
has capital adequacy ratio
of 15 percent or above with
Rs 25 lakh and above with Public deposits not
minimum investment grade exceeding 1.5 times of
NOF provided the
company has capital
31.3.1998 and adequacy ratio of 15
percent or above with
above as on 31.3.1999
(2) The loan/investment companies including those having CRAR 15 percent or above as on
date which are rated AAA and are having public deposits  1.5 times the NOF,
may accept or renew public deposits upto the deposit level outstanding as at the close of
business on December 18, 1998 or 1.5 times of the NOF whichever is more. They should,
however, reduce the excess public deposits to 1.5 times the NOF by December 31, 2001.
Those of the companies which have credit rating of A / AA as on date but do not have
capital adequacy ratio of 15 percent as on date, may accept or renew public deposits as per
the existing provisions of Directions i.e. 0.5/1.0 time of their NOF. All those companies
which are rated A/AA/AAA and are holding public deposits but whose CRAR is below 15
percent as on date, should attain the minimum capital adequacy ratio of 15 percent on or
2
before March 31, 2000 as per their audited balance sheet.
exceeding
payment of brokerage on public deposits, etc. remain unchanged.
Note : Other stipulations relating to prudential norms, ceiling on interest rates,
immediate effect
shall have 12 percent or
10 percent or above as on
capital adequacy ratio of credit rating
provided the company has
4 times of NOF
immediate effect
without credit rating
Nil
without credit rating
Nil Nil
Investment Companies Finance Companies
Companies/ Leasing/ Hire Purchase
deposits for Loan deposits for Equipment
Quantum of public Quantum of public Net owned fund (NOF)
The deposit acceptance norms will be as under :
requirement of credit rating
Entitlement of public deposit and(3) The equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies having minimum investment
grade credit rating shall be entitled to receive public deposit upto four times of their NOF
 having capital adequacy ratio of not less than 10 and 12 percent from 31.3.1998 and
 
The Bank intends to increase the CRAR for all NBFCs to 15 percent over a period of time.
The NBFCs should, therefore, endeavour to increase their CRAR to 15 percent as early as
(4) The  and those having rating below the minimum investment grade credit rating
(underrated) equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies have been allowed to
that their CRAR is not less than 15 percent as per their last audited balance sheet. However,
the unrated and underrated loan and investment companies are not entitled to receive public
(5) The  and underrated equipment leasing and hire purchase finance companies
accepting public deposits as per the new dispensation shall disclose that the company is
unrated or the latest rating of the company including when it has been rated below the
decision. Further all the NBFCs shall also disclose their exposure to the subsidiaries,
(6) The excess public deposits arising out of the downgrading in the credit rating as also the
regulatory ceilings should be regularised by repayment at the time of maturity of such
deposits. During the interregnum, the companies should not accept fresh public deposits
new directions. They may, however, renew the maturing public deposits in such a manner
that in case of downgrading of credit rating, the excess deposits are repaid within three
years of such downgrading and in case of excess arising out of regulatory ceiling by
3
express consent and at the sole volition of the depositors.
December 31, 2001. Further, the maturing public deposits should be renewed only with the
until the quantum of such deposits held by them is within the ceiling permissible as per the
Holding of excess public deposits – Regularisation
well as its directors have substantial interest.
companies in the same group, other entities and the business ventures in which the NBFC as
minimum investment grade, as the case may be, so that the depositors can take an informed
unrated
status in the advertisement
unrated Disclosure of 
deposits irrespective of their CRAR.
accept public deposits upto 1.5 times of their NOF or Rs. 10 crore whichever is less, provided
unrated
NBFCs Unrated and underrated 
possible.
complying with all other prudential norms. (ii)
31.3.1999 respectively; and
(i)
subject to their -(7) 
liquid asset securities with the Stock Holding Corporation of India Ltd. for compliance
with the requirement of NBFC Directions. This facility is expected to provide operational
(8) As a part of prudential norms, the NBFCs have been advised that they should not invest,
except for their own use, more than 10 percent of their owned fund in land and building.
The ceiling on investments in unquoted shares of other than their group/subsidiary
(9) The unincorporated bodies engaged in the business of a non-banking financial institution
are not allowed to accept deposits except from the relatives specified and the manner
prescribed in the provisions of section 45-S of the RBI Act. However, as per
recommendations of the Task Force on NBFCs, such entities could be allowed to access
loans from bodies with a corporate identity, including NBFCs. Accordingly, the deposits
from (a) the companies incorporated under the Companies Act; (b) corporations
established under any Statute; and (c) the cooperative societies registered under any State
law have been exempted from the definition of `deposit’ under the RBI Act. Individuals,
firms, associations of persons, Hindu Undivided Families and partnership firms may
accept deposits from the above mentioned corporate entities also for the purpose of their
(10)
Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/807
4
Maureen Shankar
able notifications have been issued separately. Suit
financial business.
Unincorporated bodies
surpasses the above ceiling.
such assets including the assets acquired in satisfaction of their debts, in case the company
companies. A time period of three years has been given to them to dispose off the excess of
purchase finance companies and 20 percent of the owned fund for the loan and investment
companies has been fixed at 10 percent of their owned fund for equipment leasing and hire
and unquoted shares
Investments in land and building
convenience to the NBFCs.
Apart from the scheduled commercial banks, the NBFCs have been permitted to keep their
Corporation of India Ltd. approved
Safe custody of securities – Stock Holding