September 30, 1998
The Hon'ble High Court has admitted a petition filed by the Reserve Bank of India
against M/s. Asia Pacific Investment Trust Ltd., and has passed an order on September 7,
1998 for appointment of the Official Liquidator as Provisional Liquidator to take charge of all
assets and properties of the company.  The matter has been posted for further hearing on
October 25, 1998.
It may be recalled tha t M/s. Asia Pacific Investment Trust Ltd., a non-banking
financial company (NBFC) was originally incorporated on August 30, 1983 under the
Companies Act, 1956 as M/s. Nagarjuna Investment Trust Ltd., and had changed its name to
M/s. Asia Pacific Investment Trust Ltd., on September 15, 1994. The company has its
registered office at 26, Nagajuna Hills, Panjagutta, Hyderabad 500 082. The company  had
violated various provisions of the Reserve Bank's Directions issued to NBFCs and also did
not adhere to the guidelines on prudential norms. The company was last inspected by the
Reserve Bank with reference to its financial position as on March 31, 1996. On the basis of
findings of the inspection and also in view of many complaints against the company about
default in repayment of deposits/payments of interest, the company was prohibited by the
Reserve Bank on July 9, 1997 from accepting any fresh deposits. The company was also
The company did not show any improvement in its financial position after issue of the
Prohibitory Order. Its overdue deposits from public at the end of February 1998 amounted to
Rs.32.49 crore. Taking into account all the relevant factors, the application of the company
for issue of Certificate of Registration to carry out the business of non-banking financial
institution was rejected by the Reserve Bank on May 13, 1998 and, consequently, the
company was precluded from carrying on the business of non-banking financial institution
from that date.
Some of the depositors of the company had approached the Company Law Board
(CLB) for issue of orders to the company for repayment of their deposits. The company,
however, failed to comply with the Orders passed by the CLB. The Reserve Bank, therefore,
decided to take stringent action against the company, in exercise of the powers vested in the
Reserve Bank under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. A petition for winding up of the
company was filed in the Hon'ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in terms of
Section 45MC of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
Alpana 
Press Release : 1998-99/400
General Manager
Killawala
precluded from disposing off its assets  without prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
M/s. Asia Pacific Investment Trust Ltd., Hyderabad
Provisional Liquidator appointed on