` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
21 Oct, 1997 
 
IIM Fellowship to Dr. C. Rangarajan 
Reserve Bank of India 
Press Relations Division 
Central Office 
Mumbai  
October 8, 1997 
Dr. C. Rangarajan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, was awarded the Honorary Title of FELLOW OF THE 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT, AHMEDABAD at a special convocation by the Institute on October 3, 
1997. The citation of the award reads :  
"The Society, the Board of Governors, and the Faculty of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad on 
this day the Third of October Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven, at a Special Convo cation of the Indian 
Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, confer upon Dr.C. Rangarajan the Honorary Fellowship of this Institute.  
In conferring this Fellowship, the Institute pays tribute to a person who has made significant contribution to the 
nation's growth at its most critical juncture. He was Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, for almost a 
decade; Member of the Plan ning Commission for over a year; and has been Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
since December 1992 - a glittering record. Dr. Rangarajan's contribution to financial sector reforms in India 
includes far-reaching initiatives such as securing autonomy for RBI, simplification and deregulation of the 
interest rate struc ture, reorientation of the reserve requirements of banks, strengthening the soundness of 
banks through capitalization and transparency, and upgrading of information technologies. It is now widely 
recognized that all these initiatives will impart a greater element of competition in the financial system and con 
tribute to the building of a healthy Indian economy capable of holding its own in international capital markets 
without sacri ficing its special vocation for the social and economic better ment of the disadvantaged section of 
our society.  
In conferring this Honorary Fellowship in the Silver Jubilee year of our Fellow Programme, we are particularly 
privileged to pay tribute to one of our own - a scholar, a teacher, an outstanding economic administrator, an 
architect of sound monetary manage ment, and, above all, a faculty member, who laid the foundation of our 
Fellow Programme and who has always considered Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, as his home."  
 