` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Jan 13,1997 
 
RBI Governor stresses on an efficient and risk free settlement system for a modern market economy 
An efficient and speedy payment and settlement system is the most essential prerequisite for a well functioning economy 
and as the financial transactions grow in complexity and volume, it becomes necessary for the central bank of the country 
to evolve a risk free payment and settlement system as well. This was stated by Dr. C. Rangarajan, Governor, Reserve 
Bank of India today at Pune. Dr. Rangarajan was inaugurating the first ever international seminar on Payment and 
Settlement Systems organised by the Reserve Bank of India in cooperation with the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS). The seminar has been organised in the College for Agricultural Banking, Pune in which over 30 participants from five 
SAARC countries are participating. The seminar will focus on issues relating to development of a speedy, efficient and risk 
free payment and settlement system, including the role of central banks in it.  
Dwelling on the objectives of development of a payments system, Dr. Rangarajan said that development of instruments and 
institutions which will facilitate transfer of money between individuals and institutions are crucial. Equally significant is the 
evaluation of risk involved in payment and settlement procedures. Risks are endemic in payment and settlements system 
and have assumed significance on account of an explosion in the volumes of financial transactions, concentration of risk in 
certain types of institutions, such as, banks which could lead to systemic failures and cross border transactions. The central 
banks the world over therefore take considerable pains to improve the efficiency of their payment systems, mainly the 
institutional framework. Most countries have moved over to real time gross settlement systems for funds and delivery 
versus payment system for securities transactions.  
Tracing the developments in payment and settlement systems in India, the Governor said that creation of appropriate 
instruments and development of institutional arrangements for a payment and settlement systems are the prime concerns 
of the Reserve Bank at this juncture. Currency is still an important means of payment in India, the Governor said. As much 
as 19 per cent of money supply is represented by currency in India; whereas the currency component in money supply is as 
low as 6-10 per cent in some of the G-10 and emerging market economies. Although the currency component in Indian 
money supply has come down sharply between 1950s and 1985 at 19 per cent it is still very high especially in the context of 
a very large branch network of banks. The Reserve Bank is currently engaged in finding out ways o73 and means to reduce 
the usage of currency, the Governor stated.  
As the usage of cheques and other paper instruments increases, development of a speedy and efficient settlement systems 
will become imperative. Currently there are 850 clearing houses in India which are managed by the Reserve Bank and the 
State Bank of India. Yet there are 650 centers having over five banks but no clearing house. The Governor mentioned that 
steps are being envisaged to set up clearing houses in these centres.  To facilitate speedy clearing of the growing volume of paper instruments - the volume of cheques cleared at centers 
managed by the Reserve Bank stands at 440 million today, higher by 90 million compared to 1990-91 - the Reserve Bank 
had in 1987-89 introduced the Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) technology for cheque processing and clearing 
in four metropolitan cities. This has facilitated same day intra-city settlement of payment instruments. The Reserve Bank is 
now endeavouring to extend the MICR facility to additional 26 centers in accordance with the Saraf Committee 
recommendations. This will be in addition to separate clearing of high value cheques done by the Reserve Bank at four 
metros to give same day credit to large value cheques.  
The Reserve Bank has also experimented with credit and debit clearing. The electronic clearing services (ECS) offered by 
the Reserve Bank at four metros receive credit instructions regarding payment of interest, dividend, etc., from the corporate 
houses in an electronic file and directly credit the recipient customer's account. Per contra, the customer's account can be 
debited directly for utility service payment such as, electricity or telephone bills through the ECS.  
While intra city payments can be effected on the same day, inter city settlement still takes time. In order to expedite inter 
city clearing, the Reserve Bank has introduced electronic funds transfer system. At present the system is operational 
between Mumbai and Chennai and the efforts are on to connect the computerised clearing systems at the four metros for 
operationalising EFT among them. There are also other developments such as, the use of credit cards, automated teller 
machines (ATMs), shared payment network system being set up in Mumbai, etc., which will reduce the delays in payment 
mechanism. The Reserve Bank has also decided to set up a VSAT based communication network covering about 400 
centers in the country for a closed user group of banks and financial institutions. This would not only facilitate real time 
settlement of financial transactions but help banks in their house keeping and MIS by allowing speedy transfer of data.  
In order to minimise the risk involved in transactions in government securities, the Reserve Bank, in 1995 introduced a 
delivery versus payment (DvP) system in government securities transactions. The DvP system effects the debit and credit 
entries concurrently in securities and payment accounts of buyers and sellers thus reducing the risk involved in these 
transactions. The Reserve Bank has at present adopted the gross settlement system for settling the accounts. As the 
volumes in government securities grow, this will impose a restriction on banks and it might be necessary to give daytime 
overdraft facility to banks. The Reserve Bank is currently examining this issue.  
Increasing use of technology, however, will have to be supported by appropriate changes in law and the changed attitudes 
of people using the technology. Financial stability is the prime concern of the central bank and an efficient and speedy 
payment and settlement system is central to financial stability. Learning from the experiences of other countries would thus 
be advantageous to the participants of the seminar, the Governor hoped.  
In his introductory presentation, Mr. M. Andre Bascoul, Deputy Manager, BIS, said that in the past ten years, payment 
systems have indeed become a matter of prime responsibility for the central banks as they move over to a more modern 
arrangement or as sophistication of firms and consumers increases and a more developed financial sector emerges. 
According to Mr. Bascoul, even though institutional differences exist among central banks' involvement in systems and 
there are also many differences in the environment in which oversight of financial system takes place, while reforming 
payment systems and establishing oversight regimes, it is necessary to go through a process of intensive consultation and 
arrive at an eventual consensus.  
Earlier, Shri R.V. Gupta, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India welcomed the guests and the participants and stressed 
the need for training and change in the attitude of people for an effective use of technology.  
P.T. Achuthan 
Manager  
Press Release : 1996-97/388 