July 25, 1997
Committee on Hedging against price-risk through
International Commodity Exchanges
With a view to examining the various issues relating to hedging against price-risk through
International Commodity Exchanges, the Reserve Bank of India has appointed a Committee on
Hedging through International Commodity Exchanges. Shri R. V. Gupta, Deputy Governor, RBI
will be the Chairman of the Committe. Other Members of the Committee are :
 
Shri Dipak Chatterjee Shri S. N. Sawaikar 
Additional Secretary, Dy. Managing Director, 
Ministry of Commerce State Bank of India, Mumbai
Shri Kamal Kishore, 
Shri Pavan Sukhdev 
Economic Adviser, 
Head of Treasury, 
Ministry of Food & Consumer
Deutsche Bank, Mumbai
Affairs
Shri P.R. Suresh, 
Shri Lester Periera 
Officer on Special Duty, 
Director - Treasury 
Ministry of Finance 
Barclays Bank Plc, Mumbai
Department of Economic Affairs
Shri S. D. Kapur, Shri Jamal Macklai, Partner 
Director, MMTC, New Delhi Macklai & Macklai, Mumbai
The Secretariat to the Committee will be provided by the Reserve Bank
of India.
The Committee is expected to submit its report by November 30, 1997.
 
The terms of reference of the Committee will be as follows:
A. To identity important import/export commodity groups where price volatility affects
Indian corporates, and where such risks can be hedged through recognised International
Commodity Exchanges.
 
B. To carry out a review of the financial instruments available on the said Commodity
Exchanges, and examine their appropriatensess with reference to the stated objective of
risk reduction, attendant costs and constraints associated with internal control systems
and position-tracking.
 C. To examine/identify the important facets of an appropriate corporate-level risk
management policy/strategy and make suitable recommendations, examine the extent ot
which 'ex ante' and 'ex post' scrutiny/verification can be undertaken by the regulatory
authorities, and finally, suggest a set of operational parameters with reference to which
the use of such financial instruments can be regulated /overseen.
 
D. To examine the nature and extent of legal impediments, if any, which bar the recourse of
Indian entities to international commodity exchanges, and the steps that need to be taken
in this behalf.
Alpana Killawala Deputy General Manager Press Release : 1997-98/78
 
See also
(Sep 28, 1998) RBI Guidelines on Hedging Commodity Price Risk.