` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Feb 03,1997 
 
RBI-BIS Seminar on Banking Supervision: RBI Governor stresses on capital for strong financial 
system 
Dr C Rangarajan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India inaugurated the Seminar on Bank Supervision 
today at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai. The five-day Seminar has 
been organised by the Reserve Bank of India in coordination with the Basle Committee on Banking 
Supervision and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Representatives of the central banks 
from several SAARC countries such as, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka as well as from 
Thailand are participating in the Seminar along with representatives of the various operational 
departments of the RBI from all over the country and the NABARD. This is the second Seminar 
organised by the Reserve Bank of India in coordination with BIS. The first Seminar on Payment 
systems was organised in Pune in January 1997.  
In his inaugural address, the Governor said that the Seminar assumes significance in the context of 
global concern for evolving the most appropriate form of supervision. Stating that the health of an 
economy depends on a sound and healthy financial infrastructure which can render efficient service, 
the Governor said that the world over banks and banking business are subjected to greater official 
regulation and supervision than other types of businesses because of strong public interest 
considerations and the potential danger of systemic risk that may arise on account of the failure of 
even one unit.  
The Governor stated that there are three objectives of bank regulation and supervision. These are: 
promoting soundness of banks to protect depositor funds and maintaining public confidence in the 
banking system; fostering efficient and competitive banking system that is responsive to the 
community's needs for high quality financial services at a reasonable cost; and ensuring that banks 
comply with banking regulations. Having widened and deepened the financial system over the past 
three decades in India, the supervisory concerns now are focused on improving its viability and 
efficiency.  
Summarising the reforms in the financial sector, the Governor and that they seek to improve the 
profitability and efficiency of the financial systems. The banking sector reforms have aimed at removing 
the external constraints by correcting and improving macro policy environment for banking operations, 
improving banks' financial health by introducing prudential norms and strengthening the institutional 
framework by allowing new institutions as well as improving the health of the old ones.  Dwelling at some length on prudential norms, the Governor explained that the capital adequacy 
standards have assumed importance in the developed countries in the context of increased risk borne 
by the banking system with the removal of barriers on movements of capital across the borders. The 
increased competition has also made banks operate on thinner margins and take higher risks. In the 
Indian context, the supervision of the banking system so far had been focusing only on the 
examination of credit quality. During the past four years, however, the Reserve Bank has expanded 
their scope to include prudential regulations, such as norms for income recognition, provisioning and 
capital adequacy.  
Explaining the rationale for capital adequacy norms, the Governor explained that capital serves two 
purposes - it provides long term funds and acts as a buffer against losses.  
As regards the question relating to the appropriateness of capital adequacy norms when the reserve 
requirements are high, the Governor stated that these served different purposes. While reserve 
requirements were related to liquidity, capital adequacy requirements were related to solvency. 
Further, since investments for reserve requirements carried zero risk, there was no need to maintain 
any capital against them.  
Coming to the changes introduced in the focus and methods of supervision, the Governor said that 
under the aegis of the separately constituted Board for Financial Supervision, the Reserve Bank has 
stepped up initiatives in continuous and focused supervision. As recommended by the Padmanabhan 
Committee, the RBI's supervisory examination is now directed towards assessment of three broad 
areas, viz., appraisal of asset quality, solvency, earning performance and liquidity, quality of 
management and decision making process and regulatory compliance. Supervision now also covers 
stated that central bank supervision, external auditors and internal audit form the three legs of the 
tripod of financial health management and it was necessary that each supported the other in making 
the financial system more viable and stronger.  
In his introductory remarks, Mr L Sahuquet of the Basle Committee of the BIS stated that BIS wishes to 
develop relationship with its new shareholders, especially with the RBI. He also said that the Seminar 
indicates the Basle Committee's desire for increasing cooperation with non-G 10 countries and work 
towards developing common standards of supervision around the world.  
Earlier, Shri A. Ghosh, Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India's Department of Banking 
Operations and Development welcomed the guests and participants and said that the rules framed by 
the Bank for International Settlements on capital adequacy and risk management have been found 
very useful by supervisors the world over in putting in place a sound supervisory and risk management 
system.  
P.T. Achuthan 
Manager  
Press Release : 1996-97/445  
 