` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
July 07, 1997 
 
Import of Gold/Silver/Platinum: Eligibility criteria for applying to RBI 
The Reserve Bank of India today announced detailed eligibility criteria to apply for 
authorisation as nominated agency for import of gold/silver/platinum. It may be recalled 
that Paragraph 8.15 of the Export Import Policy 1997-2002 permits exporters availing 
schemes for gold/silver/platinum jewellery and articles thereof to obtain 
gold/silver/platinum from nominated agencies. The existing nominated agencies are 
MMTC Ltd., Handicraft and Handloom Export Corporation (HHEC), State Trading 
Corporation (STC), State Bank of India (SBI) and any agency authorised by the Reserve 
Bank of India.  
The eligibility criteria announced today by the Reserve Bank are:  
a. The applicant entity should be a scheduled commercial bank.  
b. It should have unimpaired total capital of Rs.300 crore or more for its buiness in 
India. In case the capital of the bank for its business in India falls short of this, its 
global capital can be taken into consideration for this purpose, provided it has 
sufficent experiene and expertise in the area of gold internationally and it is 
willing to submit a letter of undertaking from its head office/parent to the effect 
that the letter would stand ready to provide support and assistance to its gold 
operation in India.  
c. Its ratio of total capital to risk-weighted assets for businss in India should be 9 per 
cent or more as per the latest balance sheet.  
d. It should have fairly advanced risk-management system in place to be able to 
identify various risks inolved in supply of gold to the eligible categories and 
evolve control measures.  
e. It should have excellent track record both in terms of business reputation and 
history of compliance vis-a-vis legal and regulatory norms/requirements.  
f. It should have previous experience or familiarity in respect of gold-related 
business activities. In case it does not satisfy this requirement, it should provide 
sufficient evidence about its intention and ability to forge links with international 
banks, etc, having long-standing presence in the markets for physical and 
financial gold so as to be able to develop in-house capabilites in this area.  
The Reserve Bank has asked banks satisfying these criteria to submit their application to 
th Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Department of 
Banking Operations and Development, World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade, Colzaba, 
Mumbai 400005.  
 
 The application should include the following details:  
i. Brief description about the bank and its activities.  
ii. Summary of latest audited balance sheet and profit and loss account. In the case 
of a foreign bank, audited financial statements for Indian as well as global 
operations will be required.  
iii. Information on latest capital adequacy ratios. For foreign banks, information in 
this regard will be required separately for India and global operations.  
iv. Previous experience, if any, in handling gold-related business. In case the bank 
does not have any previous experience, the manner in which the bank proposes 
to acquire the requisite expertise and enhance its in-house capabilities in this 
regard should be clearly explained.  
The Reserve Bank has also clarified that it will consider applications received up to July 
31, 1997 in the first instance and thereafter, consideration of application from eligible 
banks will be an 'on-going' process.  
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
Deputy General Manager  
 