` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
Dec 08,1997 
 
Financial Sector to be proactive in Infrastructure Development: RBI Governor 
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today called a meeting of the chief 
executives of financial institutions and major commercial banks, including the 
Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation to review the financing of infrastructure 
projects. At the outset, the meeting noted that the basic problem in infrastructure finance 
was not related to availability of funds. The Governor indicated that infrastructure was a 
national priority and it was, therefore, necessary for the financial sector to play a pro-
active role in its financing. The Chairmen of financial institutions and commercial banks 
assured the Governor that the highest priority was being given by them to financing of 
the infrastructure projects. The meeting then reviewed the problems concerning each 
sector, viz., power, telecommunications, roads and ports.  
The Chairmen of financial institutions and banks pointed out that in the case of power, 
financial closure of the projects was not a major issue. The projects were being help up 
on account of issues, such as, non-availability of environmental clearance, guaranteed 
supply of basic inputs and transportation. The problem in the case of telecommunication, 
was viability of the basic telecommunication services and not the value-added services; 
whereas in the roads segment, the financial institutions and banks also pointed out that it 
was necessary to attract more private sector promoters would provide a substantial level 
of comfort to the lenders. Land acquisition issue also acted as a major bottleneck. 
Further, minimum traffic guarantees would enhance the viability of the road projects. As 
for ports, it was observed that the State Governments, in many cases, had approved 
many locations for port development. It was therefore necessary to priortise a few 
locations to see these projects moving. Integrated development of the hinterland was 
also crucial.  
The Governor underlined the need for evolving a good mechanism for obtaining 
feedback from financial institutions and banks and taking up these issues with the 
Governmental agencies. The financial institutions/banks were advised to jointly prepare 
an action plan which would form a basis for discussions with the Government on 
infrastructure. The Governor also advised banks and financial institutions to suggest 
support measures, if any, which were needed from the Reserve Bank in facilitating 
funding of infrastrure. These could be in the area of reviewing of prudential norms, 
developing new financing instruments, etc. The Governor stated that this was the first 
meeting on financing of infrastructure which would go a long way in improving interaction 
between the Reserve Bank, financing institutions and the government. He added that 
such meetings with the financial institutions and major banks would be held regularly to 
review the progress in infrastructure financing.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/475  