` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Dec 22, 1997 
 
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers - December 1997 Issue 
The December 1997 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers (OPs) 
contains three research articles and two book reviews. They reflect the research efforts 
of the authors and their personal views.  
The article 'Fiscal Deficit, External Balance and Monetary Growth - A Study of Indian 
Economy' by C. Rangarajan and M.S. Mohanty examines the various macroeconomic 
impacts of fiscal deficit in India with special emphasis on the nature of relationship 
between deficit, external balance and monetary growth. The macro model developed in 
the paper provides an integrated framework to study the various dimensions of fiscal 
deficit and in this context to evaluate different policy options for maintaining sustainable 
internal and external balances in the Indian economy. High levels of fiscal deficit pose 
various problems for the economy, inflation and adverse balance of payments 
consequences are considered to be the serious concerns of these deficits. The study 
provides an integrated frame work to analyse the external sector dimension of the fiscal 
deficit along with its monetary and real sector implications. The policy simulation results 
reveal that fiscal deficit in general results in widening of current account deficit in the 
balance of payments, although this outcome critically depends on how the deficit is 
financed. In the case of monetary financing scenario, the price and income effects 
reinforce each other, leading to a deterioration in the external balance in the short run as 
well as in the long run. Thus, in any effort to maintain sustainable absorption and prices 
at appropriate levels has an important role to play. This underlines the need for an 
externally consistent budgetary policy, keeping in view a medium term target of current 
account deficit in relation to GDP. The study observes that deficit financing to promote 
public investment and growth involves costs in terms of loss of control on inflation and 
shows that a sustained increase in fiscal deficit financed by borrowing from the Reserve 
Bank leads to a spiral impact on prices in the long run although in the short run the 
adverse impact may look quite moderate. Even when the deficit is financed by borrowing 
from market, a prudent limit for such borrowing becomes essential. In a system of 
market determined interest rates, the financing requirement of government from the 
market should be consistent with the growth in national savings. The study notes that 
while a viable balance of payments strategy would have to be based on the supportive 
domestic policies to keep absorption and prices at appropriate levels, any temporary 
disequilibrium in the balance of payments due to adverse relative price movements may 
necessitate some adjustment of exchange rate.  
The paper 'Growth Cycles in India : An Empirical Investigation' by Himanshu Joshi 
carries out an econometric analysis of growth cycles in India for the period 1960-61 to 
1994-96. The study devides the period sixties through nineties into three broad phases and to relate these developments to the estimated cyclical movements in a number of 
important macroeconomic variables in terms of their lead, lag or coincident 
characteristics from the point of view of explaining the growth rate. The three broad 
phases include : The first phase extending from the early sixties to the late seventies can 
be recognised as a low growth era, followed by an edging up in the first half of eighties 
and a period of high trend growth (over 5 per cent per annum) beginning from 1985-86 
and continuing till the end of the sample in 1994-95. The empirical evidence presented in 
the study suggests that while monetary surprises affect growth adversely, cyclical 
fluctuations in aggregate demand variables, except public investment and private 
consumption, have an insignificant effect on future growth. The study explains these 
results by suggesting that income effects arising out of monetary and investment 
demand fluctuations can increase consumption and thus constrain future growth in 
output. The results also suggest the existence of strong positive effects of cyclical 
fluctuations in real private consumption on output growth; followed by its equally sharp 
future reversals due to capacity constraints. The study points out that cycles in 
agricultural growth have significant impact upon the performance of the rest of the 
economy. On the whole, the empirical results underscore the key role played by both 
private consumption and public investment demand in creating business cycles in India. 
From the policy point of view, a strategic reduction in private consumption (and hence an 
increase in private savings and thus investment rate) and an enhancement in the tempo 
of public investment need to be recognised as two important factors in improving the 
growth performance of the Indian economy.  
The paper by P.C. Sarker and Abhiman Das on `Development of Composite Index of 
Banking Efficiency : The Indian Case' explores the efficiency of the Indian Banking 
Sector with regard to productivity, profitability and financial management for the year 
1994-95. For each of the performance criteria, area-specific efficiency index has been 
worked out based on 15 indicators and using Principal Component Analysis. The study 
is based on 73 scheduled commercial banks which account for over 95 per cent of 
deposits and credits of all scheduled commercial banks. The results of the study based 
on the balance sheets in 1994-95 showed that there is a wide variation in efficiency per 
formance among banks with different ownership pattern. The performances of public 
sector banks were relatively poor compared to other category of banks. This might be 
attributed to their typical organisational culture, technological development, employment 
pattern and managerial skills, etc. The group-wise performance indicated that excepting 
a few, not much variation could be found in terms of overall efficiency indices of the 
public sector banks, whereas there was a wide variation in performance within the 
foreign banks. The paper notes that apart from internal factors, the performance of 
public sector banks are influenced by several external factors such as the policy 
conditions relating to the allocation of credit to certain priority sectors and their 
entrenchment into the rural areas. Accounting for these conditions, the efficiency 
performance of public sector banks may not be very divergent from that of the other 
category of banks. Nevertheless, in so far as their relatively poor performance is due to 
internal factors within their controls, the prospect for improved efficiency will critically 
depend on how efficiently they reorient their activities so as to turn around their position 
vis-a-vis the most efficient operators in the banking industry.  
(P.T. Achuthan) 
Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/533  
 