` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
May 2, 2008 
Liquid Assets for NBFCs 
The Reserve Bank of India today announced with immediate effect certain refinements 
in the percentage of liquid assets to be maintained by non-banking financial companies.  
Quantum 
In terms of the provisions of Section 45IB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the 
NBFCs are required to maintain liquid assets equivalent to 10 per cent of their deposit 
liabilities in the specified approved securities, viz., government securities and 
government guaranteed bonds. The loan and investment companies which are required 
to maintain reduced percentage of liquid assets at 7.5 per cent under the existing 
provisions of the Non-Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions 1977 
shall, however, continue to invest not less than 5 percent of their deposit liabilities in 
such approved securities as hitherto. The residuary non-banking companies are also 
required to continue maintaining liquid assets of not less than 10 percent of their total 
liabilities to depositors in the government securities and government guaranteed bonds.  
Date of reference 
The date with reference to which the liquid assets will have to be maintained has also 
been specified. The NBFCs are required to maintain the prescribed liquid assets on 
each day of the relevant quarter on the basis of their deposit liabilities out standing on 
the last working day of the second preceding quarter. For example, the liquid assets to 
be maintained during the quarter ended June 30, 1997 shall be related to the deposit 
liabilities as on the last working day of the quarter ended December 31, 1996. Thus, 
NBFCs have been allowed time to assess the need for such investments sufficiently in 
advance and comply with the requirement.  
 
The earlier requirement of NBFCs making investments (of two and  one-half per cent or 
five per cent of the deposits, as applicable) in other specified assets such as balances 
with banks and trustee securities has been discontinued.  Returns  
The Reserve Bank has also prescribed a format for reporting the compliance with the 
requirement of liquid assets on a quarterly basis. NBFCs are required to submit a return 
indicating the position of deposits vis-a-vis such investments at the end of every quarter 
within a period of 15 days of the month succeeding the quarter to which it relates. The 
format will be available at the Financial Companies Wing of the concerned Regional 
Offices of the Department of Supervision.  
Penalty 
For the failure of NBFCs to maintain the required percentage of assets in the specified 
manner, the Reserve Bank has powers to impose penalty at the rate of three per cent 
per annum above the bank rate on the amount of shortfall on any day during the quarter 
and if the shortfall continues in the subsequent quarter/s, at five per cent per annum 
above the bank rate on the amount of shortfall for each subsequent quarter during which 
the default continues.  
Background 
The Government of India had issued the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1997 on January 9, 1997 which has since been replaced by the RBI 
(Amendment) Act. The provisions of the RBI Act stipulate the requirement of 
maintenance of assets in the approved securities whose market value shall not be less 
than 5 per cent or such higher percentage not exceeding 25 per cent as the Reserve 
Bank may specify, of the deposits outstanding at the end of the last working day of the 
second preceding quarter. The above changes have been announced by the Reserve 
Bank in terms of the amended provisions of Section 45IB of the RBI Act, 1934.  
 
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
Deputy General Manager  
 
Press Release : 1996-97/679  
 