` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
 
Nov 21,1997 
 
Report of the Committee on "Hedging Through International Commodity 
Exchanges" 
Shri R.V. Gupta, Chairman of the Committee on Hedging Through International 
Commodity Exchanges, today formally presented the Report of the Committee to Dr.C. 
Rangarajan, Governor, RBI. While presenting the Report of the Committee Shri Gupta 
appreciated the valuable contribution made by each member of the Committee. The 
members of the Committee included Shri Dipak Chatterjee, Addl.Secretary, Ministry of 
Commerce, Shri Kamal Kishore, Economic Adviser, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Shri 
P.R. Suresh, Officer on Special Duty, Ministry of Finance, Shri S.N. Sawaikar, 
Dy.Managing Director, State Bank of India, Shri S.D. Kapoor, Director, MMTC, Shri 
Pavan Sukhdev, Deutsche Bank, Shri Lester Pereira, Barclays Bank, and Shri Jamal 
Mecklai of Mecklai & Mecklai. Shri Gupta also appreciated the special contribution made 
by the Secretary of the Committee, Shri A.K. Batra, Additional Chief General Manager, 
Exchange Control Department, Reserve Bank of India. He acknowledged the dedicated 
support rendered by other members of the secretariat, Shri N.H. Siddiqui, General 
Manager, Exchange Control Department, Shri V.S. Sharma, Deputy General Manager, 
Exchange Control Department, Smt.K.T.P. Nambiar, Asst.General Manager, Exchange 
Control Department and Shri Sujan Hazra, Research Officer, Department of Economic 
Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India. Shri Gupta also stated that a number of 
presentations were made before the Committee by representatives of several 
prospective user-groups as also firms offering different types of hedge products in 
overseas markets.  
Dr.Rangarajan placed on record his appreciation for the excellent work done by the 
Committee and the fact that the Committee had been able to complete its task well 
within the scheduled time frame.  
Terms of Reference 
The terms of reference of the Committee were to: (i)identify import/export commodity 
groups where price volatility affects Indian corporates and the risks that can be hedged 
through International Commodity Exchanges, (ii) carry out a review of the financial 
instruments available on the Commodity Exchanges, (iii) examine/identify important 
facets of an appropriate corporate level risk management policy/strategy, (iv) examine 
the nature and extent of legal impediments.  The Outline of the Report 
The Report of the Committee is organised into six chapters supported by three 
annexures, and three tables giving information relating to Exchange - traded 
commodities, trade volumes of selected exchanges and selected information on specific 
international futures and options exchanges. Chapter I sets out the background against 
which the Committee was appointed. Chapter II gives an overview of commodity futures 
Chapter III furnishes the contemporary regulations in futures markets as evidenced from 
selected countries. Chapter IV presents an Indian perspective on hedging against 
commodity price risk. Chapter V delineates the operational framework relevant to Indian 
corporates seeking to hedge their exposures. Chapter VI contains the conclusions and 
summary of recommendations.  
Current Status of Commodity Hedging 
At present, Indian entities are not in a position to take recourse to hedge instruments 
available in off-shore commodity futures and options markets due to restrictive 
provisions of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act (FCRA), 1952. However, 
irrespective of other provisions of FCRA 1952, Article 27 of the Act empowers the 
Central Government to exempt, subject to such conditions as may be specified, any 
contracts from operation of all or any of the provisions of the Act. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that, by a suitable notification in gazette under Article 27 of the 
Act, the Central Government may allow Indian entities access to off shore 
futures/options products.  
From the exchange control angle, certain items which constitute cost of hedging will 
require to be permitted. The Committee recommends that the Reserve Bank of India 
may accord the necessary approvals in this behalf.  
Hedge - Rationale 
Price-risk is a function of the extent to which corporates are price takers and the extent 
to which input/output prices are volatile. On this basis, groups of Indian 
importers/corporates exposed to price risk can be identified. Progressive deregulation, 
reduced relevance of price influencing state interventions and the consequential greater 
role of market forces, has meant more uncertainty in asset prices. Viewed thus, giving 
freedom to hedge against price risks is an integral part of the process of economic 
reform and liberalisation. A consistent policy-stance on risk management should not 
differentiate among different types of risk. If companies can access off-shore financial 
markets for hedging interest/currency risks, similar access to off-shore derivative 
products should be permitted to those seeking to reduce commodity price risk. The 
Committee therefore recommends that all Indian entities which have genuine underlying 
commodity price risk exposures should be permitted recourse to hedge instruments 
available in off-shore markets, subject to operational safeguards of prudential nature.  
Indian Framework 
Successful hedging requires that two pre-conditions must be satisfied - (a) the new 
position assumed on the commodity exchange seeks to address a genuine/authentic 
underlying risk, and (b) the hedge transaction is correctly executed and monitored. In the 
event either or both these conditions are not met, hedging will acquire a speculative hue 
and in the process may increase the firm's exposure to risk. Three basic types of hedge operations which Indian corporates are likely to use would be -(a) offset hedge, (b) price-
fixing hedge, and (c) options.  
The Committee is of the view that there is clear justification on balance for regulatory 
focus to remain firmly fixed on helping Indian corporates with authentic price exposures 
to achieve risk-reduction, and NOT potential price participation with a view to making 
extra profits. This need be so only for the initial period of about one year or so, which 
could be termed as Phase-I. During this phase, only commodity futures will be permitted 
for hedging purposes. In due course, as corporates develop core risk management 
skills, acquire some experience and in-house expertise, they can be permitted access to 
a more sophisticated hedging strategy combining use of futures and options.  
For certain types of commodity price risks, effective hedging may not be possible with 
the help of exchange traded instruments. The Committee recommends that during 
Phase-I, user-firms should ordinarily be permitted access to exchange traded risk 
management products, while OTC products can be availed of where either exchange 
traded products are not available or efficient hedging is demonstrably not possible if 
reliance is solely on exchange traded products. However, the relative OTC markets must 
necessarily have some depth, liquidity, transparency and equitable access. During 
Phase I, use of OTC products can be restricted to vanilla swaps. OTC-options can be 
permitted in Phase-II.  
Where hedging is conducted on off-shore commodity exchanges, the Indian regulatory 
authorities have no role of any nature vis-a-vis these exchanges which function under 
the jurisdictional authority of their own regulators. Indian regulatory authorities do 
possess the `negative' right to `not participate' i.e., forbid access to the domestic users.  
Derivatives can sometimes generate high losses. When measured against the enormous 
volume of business undertaken in derivatives worldwide, these losses have been 
comparatively few in number. Among factors which have commonly contributed to these 
losses are excessive position taking in high risk instruments, ineffective internal risk 
management procedures and operational controls, inadequacies in corporate policy 
regarding use of derivatives and, not least, insufficient understanding of the nature and 
risks of derivatives. There does exist an imbalance between the development/availability 
of such fairly sophisticated instruments and the capacity of end-users to fully understand 
and employ the same without collateral financial damage. During the initial `transitional' 
period, the said imbalance in respect of the Indian-user (wholly new to this type of 
activity) could prove to be a source of concern. Given this context, Committee is not in 
favour of an approach that wholly dispenses with any form or type of `ex-ante' scrutiny 
and relies upon corporates to formulate, implement, and oversee prudent hedge 
strategies. Even if some general parameters of operational nature could be set-out for 
the guidance of end-users, it would not be advisable to assume that Indian corporates 
interested in hedging overseas will be either sufficiently knowledgeable or sufficiently 
careful. A brief period of transition/ acclimitisation is necessary wherein the company 
boards and senior management get an opportunity to internalise risk management 
techniques.  
The Committee recommends that hedge-freedom be given to Indian end-users in two 
distinct Phases; Phase-I, which can be for one year (up to end 1998), and Phase II 
commencing from the January 1999. Phase-I, the period of acclimitisation, has to 
provide for a modicum of regulatory oversight to see that genuine underlying exists, the 
proposed hedge instruments are appropriate in relation to the stated objectives, and risk management process is/will be in place. The regulatory input in Phase-I will be neither 
intrusive nor transaction-specific. The scope of regulatory input during Phase-I can be 
said to consist of - (i) a simple diligence exercise at pre-eligibility stage to see that the 
concerned corporate has authentic underlying exposure, a clear-cut board-approved risk 
management policy has been formulated, and the corporate is prepared to put in place a 
well-designed system of internal controls and ensure periodic oversight by the Company 
Board on an on-going basis, (ii) periodic scrutiny of actual hedge operations based 
principally on review reports put up to the Board, supplemented by Chartered 
Accountant certificates about the adequacy or otherwise of the company's internal 
controls and accounting systems. During Phase-II, stage (i) can be dispensed with, 
stage (ii) can continue which consists only of periodic ex-post scrutiny of actual hedge-
operations. During Phase-I, corporates can be permitted access to exchange traded 
futures and select commodity OTC derivates, if warranted. Exchange-traded options and 
select commodity OTC options can be permitted in Phase-II.  
Practical steps should be taken by Indian entities to put in place effective risk 
management systems, in a form suitable to the precise circumstances of the user, 
including the size, frequency and purpose of transactions. The Committee has also 
delineated the major facets of a comprehensive risk management strategy appropriate to 
the use of hedge instruments and has emphasised that the successful operationalisation 
of this will require in-depth involvement of the board of directors (or its equivalent) of the 
concerned companies and their senior managements.  
The full text of the report will be available on the RBI website on the Internet 
(http://www.rbi.org.in) from Saturday, November 22, 1997.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/407  
 