` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Dec 10,1997 
RBI's Working Group on Money Supply 
It has been decided to set up a Working Group on `Money Supply : Analytics and Methodology of Compilation' to re-
examine the analytical aspects of monetary survey in view of the changing dimensions and depth of the financial sector with 
the introduction of financial sector reforms.  
The terms of reference of the Working Group are :  
a. to examine the adequacy of the existing money stock measures for appropriately reflecting the liquidity in the economic 
system and in this context, consider the possibility of including any other financial asset(s);  
b. to suggest improvements in the existing reporting system and to recommend new reporting systems where necessary, 
from the relevant economic entities;  
c. to suggest suitable arrangements for effecting transition from the present system of reporting, compilation, and 
dissemination of data to the recommended system;  
d. to examine the appropriate form of presentation of data to the public in the light of the widely prevalent practices of 
central banks; and  
e. to consider any other related matters.  
The Working Group is expected to submit its report within three months.  
 
The Department of Economic Analysis and Policy (DEAP) would provide secretarial assistance to the Working Group.  
Chaired by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, the Working Group will have Dr.A.Vasudevan, 
Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India as its Vice-Chairman. Prof. Ganti Subrahmanyam, National Institute of Bank 
Management, Prof. Romar Correa, University of Bombay and Dr.B.K.Bhoi, Director, Monetary Modelling Unit, Department 
of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India will be the members of the Working Group. Shri Deepak Mohanty, 
Director, Division of Money and Banking, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India will be the 
Member-Secretary.  
 
The Chief General Managers of the relevant departments of the Reserve Bank would be associated with the Working 
Group as special invitees.  
 
The Working Group may also co-opt any other members as special invitees.  
 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/482  
 