` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
Dec 04,1997 
RBI sets up High Level Committees to improve Delivery Systems and Simplify 
procedure for  Agricultural Credit and SSIs 
RBI sets up High Level Committees to improve Delivery Systems and Simplify procedure 
for Agricultural Credit and SSIs Dr.Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today 
announced the decision to set up a one-man committee of Shri R.V.Gupta, former 
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in order to give a further impetus to the flow of 
credit to the agricultural sector. Shri Gupta has been requested to study the working of 
the agricultural credit system and the problems encountered by them. For the purpose of 
this study, Shri Gupta will personally visit select branches and regional offices of 
commercial banks, get a feedback from agriculturists, farmers, agricultural scientists, 
extension workers, etc., as well as the field level bank staff Shri Gupta will also make 
proposals on any further initiative that may be taken by commercial banks to meet all 
genuine credit requirements of agriculturists.  
Shri Gupta has been requested to propose, on the basis of the feedback received at the 
ground level, further procedural improvements and simplifications, including reduction in 
paper work for the delivery of farm credit.  
The Governor has also announced the setting up of another one-man committee under 
Shri S.L.Kapoor, former Secretary, Small Scale Industries (SSIs) to undertake a similar 
exercise in respect of flow of credit to SSIs. Shri Kapoor has been requested to review 
the working of the credit delivery system for SSIs with a view to making the system much 
more effective, simple and efficient to administer. S/Shri Gupta and Kapoor have been 
requested to give their recommendations to the RBI by March 1998.  
Setting up of both the committees are reflective of the high priority the Reserve Bank 
attaches to make the credit system for agriculture and small scale entrepreneurs hassle-
free and customer-friendly.  
Background 
Agricultural credit  
 
Agriculture contributes 29.4 per cent of the GDP employing 64 per cent of the country's 
work force. During the Eighth Five Year Plan, agriculture registered an annual growth 
rate of 3.4 per cent with the foodgrain output growth at 3 per cent. In the Ninth Five Year 
Plan, agricultural growth has been targeted at 4.5 per cent.   
Since the inception of the economic reform process, there has been a significant 
expansion of the flow of credit to the agricultural sector from Rs.11,202 crore by all 
agencies in 1991-92 to Rs.28,653 crore in 1996-97 and further to an estimated 
Rs.34,274 crore in 1997-98. This has been possible, among others, on account of the 
expansion in the institutional framework for rural finance, refinance extended by the 
National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD) to rural financial 
institutions, the Reserve Bank's support by way of General Line of Credit to NABARD for 
short-term credit, introduction of Special Agricultural Credit Plans, etc. The Reserve 
bank has played a key role in motivating commercial banks which have done this lending 
as a part of their normal activity and repayments in the sector have improved 
considerably. In spite of this, there is a perception that investment in agriculture, 
particularly 'non-farm' investments, have not kept pace with demand.  
 
The Gupta Committee has been set up to undertake a quick survey to ascertain the 
constraints faced by banks in increasing the flow of credit, introducing new products and 
services and simplifying the procedures and methods of working and to ascertain the 
difficulties faced by borrowers in obtaining adequate and expeditious credit.  
 
 
Financing of Small Scale Industries  
 
It may be noted that based on the recommendations of the Nayak Committee, the 
Reserve Bank of India has issued various guidelines to banks in 1993 with a view to 
stepping up the credit flow to the SSI sector. The banks were advised in particular to 
provide working capital limits to SSIs by adopting a simpler method of computing the 
working capital credit limits on the basis of a minimum of 20 per cent of the projected 
annual turnover for borrowers whose credit requirements are up to Rs.2 crore. The 
banks were also advised to give preference to tiny industries and other small industries 
within that segment. With the result, the flow of credit from public sector banks to SSI 
sector has improved from Rs.19,388 crore (14.6 per cent of the net bank credit) in March 
1993 to Rs.31,542 crore (16.6 per cent of the net bank credit) in March 1997.  
 
Despite the steady increase in the flow of credit to the SSI sector, there are, however, 
often complaints relating to the adequacy and timeliness of credit to this sector. The 
government had appointed an expert committee on small enterprises headed by Shri 
Abid Hussain which submitted its report in January 1997. The recommendations of the 
Abid Hussain Committee cover various facets of the SSI sector and in particular the 
definition for classification of a unit as SSI is being revised so as to cover units with 
investment in plant and machinery up to Rs.3 crore (from the present limit of Rs.60 
lakh/Rs.75 lakh). The definition of tiny enterprises is also being enhanced to cover units 
with investment in plant and machinery up to Rs.25 lakh (present limit Rs.5 lakh). The 
banks have also been advised that 40 per cent of the funds available to all segments of 
the SSI sector should be made available to units with investment in plant and machinery 
up to Rs.5 lakh, 20 per cent to units with investment in plant and machinery between 
Rs.5 lakh and Rs.25 lakh and the remaining 40 per cent to other SSI units.   
In recent years, the banks have also operationalised a number of specialised SSI 
branches (353 at end March 1997) with a view to paying special attention to the 
financing of small scale units. The adequacy and timely provision of credit was also 
reviewed by a Standing Advisory Committee on SSIs in June 1997. The Committee 
emphasised the need for adhering to various guidelines and the banks were urged to 
quickly take credit decisions. While all these initiatives have yielded considerable results, 
it cannot be gainsaid that access of small scale units to bank credit is generally 
inadequate. The Kapoor committee has been appointed against this backdrop to look 
into the problems confronting the SSI units and to suggest the necessary operational 
changes for the purpose.  
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/558  
 