` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
Dec 08,1997 
Working Group for harmonising the role and operations of DFIs and Banks 
The Reserve Bank of India today announced constitution of a Working Group with a view 
to harmonising the role and operations of development finance institutions (DFIs) and 
banks. Headed by Shri S.H. Khan, Chairman & Managing Director, Industrial 
Development Bank of India, the Working Group will have the following terms of 
reference:  
i. To review the role, structure and operations of DFIs and commercial banks in 
emerging operating environment and to suggest changes;  
ii. To suggest measures for bringing about harmonisation in the lending and 
working capital finance by banks and DFIs;  
iii. To examine whether DFIs could be given increased access to short-term funds 
and the regulatory framework needed for the purpose;  
iv. To suggest measures for strengthening of organisation, human resources, risk 
management practices and other related issues in DFIs and commercial banks in 
the wake of Capital Account Covertibility.  
v. To make such other recommendations as the Working Group may deem 
appropriate.  
Other members on the Working Group include:  
Shri M.S. Verma, Chairman, State Bank of India; Shri K.V. Karmath, Chief Executive 
Officer & Managing Director, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Ltd., 
Shri K.D. Agrawal, Chairman & Managing Director, Industrial Finance Corporation of 
India Ltd., Shri M.G. Bhinde, Chairman & Managing Director, Bank of India and Shri A.T. 
Pannir Selvam, Chairman & Managing Director, Union Bank of India.  
 
Shri V. Subrahmanyam, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India will be the Member-
Secretary to the Working Group. The Working Group is expected to submit its report 
within three months.  
 
The demarcation of responsibilities between banks and DFIs relating to working capital 
finance and term finance followed in the pre-reform era is undergoing a major 
transformation in the post financial sector reform era. This has led to a blurring of the 
distinction between the lending operations of the two sets of institutions. On the 
resources side, DFIs' access to government guranteed bonds (SLR bonds), which used 
to be their major source has been phased out and they are raising their resources 
almost entirely at market related interest rates. They have recently been given some 
access to short term funds subject to certain conditions. DFIs have been seeking to raise the ceiling on their access to short term funds and remove the restrictive conditions so 
as to bring them on par with banks. On the other hand, banks too have been seeking a 
level-playing field in areas such as, reserve requirements on DFIs in relation to their 
short term funds. Capital Account Convertibility when introduced is likely to bring about 
further changes in the operating environment necessitating advance action on the part of 
banks and DFIs to strengthen their organisations. The Working Group has been set up 
in the light of these changes and keeping in view the need for evolving an efficient and 
competitive financial system.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/472  
 