` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
21-10-1997 
 
Monetary and Credit Policy for Second half of 1997-98 
 
Measures 
 
Dr. C. Rangarajan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today announced the Monetary and Credit Policy for the 
second-half of 1997-98. He was addressing the chief executives of leading scheduled commercial banks in 
Mumbai. While the measures have been summarised in the enclosed table, some highlights of the measures 
include:  
• Bank Rate reduced by one percentage point to 9 per cent  
• CRR reduced by two percentage points and SLR made uniform at 25 per cent.  
• Interest rates on domestic term deposits deregulated.  
• Banks to prescribe a separate prime term lending rate.  
• Interest rate on pre-shipment rupee export credit reduced by one percentage point.  
• Bridge loans against equity issues/flows permitted.  
• Improvements in credit delivery for sugar, small scale industries, trade, transport, services and housing.  
• Ready forward in PSU bonds and debt securities permitted.  
• Measures for further development of money and government securities market.  
Stance of Monetary and Credit Policy 
 
Continues to seek to attend the twin-objective of promoting price stability and ensuring availability of adequate 
bank credit for productive sectors.  
 
Rationale and approach 
 
Explaining the raionale of the policy, Governor Rangarajan stated that the measures enunciated today, 
essentially reflect a multi-pronged approach to monetary management. The carry forward the reforms that were 
initiated in April 1997 and facilitate the use of macro-economic and structural measures to deepen as well as to 
bring about integration of the financial markets. This is necessary to achieve financial stability and allocative 
efficiency, he added.  
Governor stated that the need to keep the overall monetary growth within the targeted range stems from the 
objective of maintaining a reasonable degree or price stability which by itself is of critical importance in ensuring 
domestic stability and international competitiveness.  
The thrust of the policy, Governor explained, has been on reduction of direct methods of control and to use 
interest rates as signals to bring about efficient functioning of the financial system.  Dr. Rangarajan explained that the measures announced today aim at expanding the lendable resources of 
banks and reducing the cost of funds without impairing the profitability of banks. The deregulation of interest 
rates and the reduction of cash reserve ratio would give enough degrees of freedom to banks in the 
management of their portfolios in optimising profits and productivity Governor stressed that the gains arising out 
of these measures would need to be shared with borrowers.  
Pointing out that the interest rates have come down sharply during the year so far and that the inflation rate has 
also dropped significantly, Governor stressed that banks on their part would also have to make concerted 
efforts to reduce spreads and pass on some of the efficiency gains in the form of lower interest rates to the 
borrowers.  
In a special exhortation to the bankers, the Governor stated that while credit for production is necessary, it is 
equality important to ensure that the distribution channels, that is trade and the services sector get the required 
credit. In this context, Governor asked the banks to have the arrangements for finance reviewed by their boards 
with a view to enhancing the resources flowing to trade and to devise alternative methods of assessing the loan 
requirements of the services sector. He also requested banks to evolve suitable schemes which will result in the 
increased availability of credit to these sectors. Two other sectors which need special mention are housing and 
auto finance, particularly for trucks, Governor added and said that expansion in both these sectors is likely to 
have large multipier effects.  
With a view to ensuring prompt settlement of dues of SSI units as also to encouraging bills' culture, Governor 
also advised banks to ensure that with effect from January 1, 1998 banks extend not less than 25 per cent of 
the total inland credit purchases of their borrowers through bills drawn on banks by concerned sellers.  
Dr. Rangarajan, desired that bank boards should lay down the loan policies in cler-cut terms in respect of 
different categories of borrowers - small, medium and large.  
In conclusion, the Governor cautioned bankers that with progressive liberlisation of the financial markets, 
comprehensive risk management was essential. The recent events in the international scene have 
demonstrated the critically of the soundness of the financial system for maintaining macro-economic stability 
and for ensuring sustained growth. In this context, it is imperative that banks, being the vital component of the 
financial system, should equip themselves to meet the challenges of the second phase of the financial sector 
reforms which will compel banks to operate in a more competitive environment. The response should be in 
terms of improved organisational effectiveness and better risk management.  
Background 
• Perceptible deceleration in inflation rates.  
• Sharp downward movement in interest rates, both short-term and long-term.  
• Government's market borrowing programme nearly complete.  
• Stable foreign exchange market.  
• Though industrial production in the first four months of 1997-98 was sluggish, demand expected to 
augment and result in improved consumption, investment and exports.  
• M  around proejcted trajectory of 15-15.5 per cent.  
3
• Strong growth in aggregate deposits.  
• Non-food credit shows a pick-up in recent period  
• Strong growth in bank investments in corporate paper.  
• Capital market somewhat sluggish.  
(Alpana Killawala) 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/320  
 