` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Dec 12,1997 
Study on Placing a Statutory Limit on Public Debt 
A paper entitled "Placing a Statutory Limit on Public Debt" prepared by Shri K. Kanagasabapathy, Dr. R.K. Pattnaik, and 
Ms. K. A. Jayanthi, seeks to address various aspects relating to the issue of placing a statutory limit on public debt. The 
paper has the objective of inviting a constructive and meaningful debate on the vital subject.  
The issue of placing a statutory limit on public debt has gained prominence recently in the context of considerable 
importance given to the fiscal consolidation measures in terms of lower levels of deficit and debt. The Paper deals at length 
with the theoretical as also the practical aspects of the rationale for fixing a statutory limit on public debt.This paper 
attempts to analyse the pros and cons of the subject and to suggest a possible modality to place such a limit.  
The paper attempts to analyse the various components of public debt in the light of Indian budgetary practices and reviews 
the trends in the size of public debt and related budgetary impacts. While the Central Government debt secured under the 
Consolidated Fund of India would include only domestic market borrowings and the external borrowings, it leaves out a 
substantial portion of other liabilities arising in Government's account more in its capacity as a banker. Such borrowings are 
shown as part of public account. One issue, while contemplating on fixing a limit on public debt is, therefore, whether it 
should include only borrowings secured under the Consolidated Fund of India or it should encompass all interest bearing 
obligations including the other liabilities of the Government.  
A second related issue is whether only one level of the Government, such as, the Central Government should be covered 
or the government sector as a whole, including the State Governments and public undertakings. While the paper brings out 
certain dimensions of debt at various levels of the Government, the focus is centered upon the central government debt and 
other liabilities.  
An analysis of the size of public debt shows that the Central Government liabilities increased significantly both in absolute 
terms and as a percentage of total expenditure and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The volume of debt has also 
shown significant increase, in terms of both, stock and flow.  
There are three broad implications of increasing debt flow and larger size of accumulated debt stock of the Government. 
First, interest payments as percentage of total expenditure grow to unsustainable levels, particularly when there are no 
commensurate returns on public spending, cutting into other essential expenditures. Secondly, the marginal cost of 
borrowings in creases, impacting upon the real rate of interest in the economy resulting in crowding out private investment 
and thereby affecting the real growth. Thirdly, the substantial net additional borrowings result in ballooning of gross 
borrowing requirements and bunching of repayments. The main argument supporting fixation of a limit on public debt arises 
from its impact on the real rate of interest, crowding out the total private investment and thereby affecting the real growth 
rate. Such debt accumulation also generates shifting of the debt burden from one generation to the other and at a later 
stage resulting in higher inflation tax. The dynamics of deficit and debt create a vicious cycle of ballooning deficits 
particularly in the backdrop of increasing cost of borrowings without any commensurate return on outlays or faster 
economic growth giving buoyancy to revenues. On the other hand, the increasing revenue deficits have induced the 
mismatch between assets and liabilities, curtailed capital outlays and possibly crowded out private investment which all 
have adverse implications for growth.  
A statutory limit apart from removing such deficiencies, has certain other advantages too. It enhances the credibility of anti-
inflationary policy stance of the Government and makes domestic economy more efficient in terms of resources use. Fixing 
a statutory limit enforces the political will of the Government through legislative means. There are also some arguments 
against placing a statutory limit on public debt, the chief among then being that it may make budgetary operations inflexible. 
Such problems, however, can be tackled by devising a flexible framework for operating the statutory limit.   
Country experiences show that while many countries have placed limits on government's access to central bank credit, a 
major step towards limiting debt financing has come from the European Union countries where two separate limits for 
government borrowings, one based on flow of debt in a year and the other based on the debt stock at the end of every 
financial year. The limits have been fixed as a ratio to the GDP. There are countries like the United States which aims to 
move towards a zero deficit goal by the year 2002 and Indonesia which has been practising the balanced budget criteria 
right since 1966. New Zealand has embarked upon a comprehensive reform towards prudential fiscal management under 
the new Fiscal Responsibility Act.  
Viewed in the background of the analysis of public debt, the rationale for fixing a statutory limit and the other country 
experiences, the issues and options in the Indian context are discussed in the light of constitutional provisions. Under 
Article 292 of the Indian Constitution, the Parliament is empowered to fix limit on borrowings upon the security of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. Under Article 293 of the Indian Constitution, States have similar powers. The important 
questions to be addressed before fixing a limit on public debt are :  
• what should be the level of limit on debt? Should the limit cover only public debt or other liabilities of the 
Government?  
• Should the limit be fixed in absolute terms or as percentage of meaningful denominators like public expenditure 
or GDP?  
While a constitutional amendment would be required for extending the limit to all liabilities of the Government, the initial 
effort could be to fix limits in terms of both flow and stock taking into account only borrowings secured under the 
Consolidated Fund of India and mandatorily placing it before the Parliament along with supplementary information on other 
liabilities including guarantees and the overall public sector deficit. The Government's endeavour in the medium term could 
be to bring about a suitable constitutional amendment, enhancing the scope of Parliamentary powers to cover all liabilities.  
(NOTE : The study is published in the December 1997 issue of the RBI Bulletin and is also available on the RBI Website. 
(http://www.rbi.org.in)  
 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager  
Press Release : 1997-98/493  
 