` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
May 09, 1997 
Non-banking Financial Institutions - Summary of  the  Recent   
Amendments  to  the  RBI  Act 
Background 
The activities of non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) were being regulated by the 
provisions of Chapter IIIB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (the RBI Act) for over 
three decades. The emphasis of these regulations was, however, on the acceptance of 
deposit by NBFCs mainly as an adjunct to monetary and credit policy. Over the years, 
these companies have become an important segment in the financial system of the 
country. Besides, there has been inter-penetration of the markets, both, by banks and 
non-banks resulting in erosion of the distinction between these two kinds of institutions 
within the group of financial institutions. These developments have rendered the existing 
regulatory framework inadequate to regulate the activities of NBFCs and provide 
protection to the depositor. With a view, therefore, to effectively regulating the NBFCs 
and thereby improving their financial health and viability, an Ordinance effecting 
comprehensive changes in the provisions of Chapters IIIB and V of the RBI Act was 
promulgated by the Government of India on January 9, 1997.  
The Ordinance has since been replaced by the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 
1997. The amended Act has also modified the provisions of Chapter IIIC of the RBI Act 
relating to acceptance of deposits by unincorporated bodies. While the provisions of 
Chapter IIIB and V have come into effect from the date of the Ordinance, that is January 
9, 1997 those relating to Chapter IIIC are effective from April 1, 1997. The salient 
features of the amended Act are summarised below:  
Chapter IIIB 
Definition 
i. The "business of a non-banking financial institution" is defined to mean carrying 
on the business of a financial institution referred to in clause (c) of section 45I of 
the Act and includes business of a non-banking financial company referred to in 
clause (f) ibid.  
ii. A company engaged in industrial activities or agricultural operations as its 
principal business is excluded from the definition of 'financial institution'.  
iii. A non-banking financial company has been defined to mean:  
a. a financial institution which is a company;  b. a non-banking institution which is a company and which has as its 
principal business the receiving of deposit under any scheme or 
arrangement or in any other manner, or lend ing in any manner; or  
c. any other non-banking institution notified by the Reserve Bank.  
Entry Point Norm 
i. An NBFC is required to have a certificate of registration and also have a net 
owned fund (NOF) of not less than Rs. 25 lakh to commence or carry on the 
business of a non-banking financial o73 institution. The Reserve Bank, however, 
can raise the minimum NOF requirement up to Rs. 2 crore. Every NBFC existing 
as on January 9, 1997 is required to apply to the Reserve Bank for registration 
before July 8, 1997. NBFCs which are already registered with the Reserve Bank 
under the earlier guidelines are also required to apply to the Reserve Bank again 
for registration. NBFCs which were in existence before January 9, 1997 would be 
allowed to carry on their business until a certificate of registration is issued to 
them or rejection of their application for registration is communicated to them.  
NBFCs having NOF of less than Rs.25 lakh as on January 9, 1997 may carry on their 
activities but will be required to attain the prescribed NOF of Rs.25 lakh within a period 
of three years from the date of the Ordinance. The Reserve Bank may, for sufficient 
reasons, extend this time limit by another three years, subject to the condition that such 
NBFCs should intimate about their attaining the required NOF to the Reserve Bank 
within three months from the date of such attainment.  
The Reserve Bank is empowered to cancel the certificate of registration issued to any 
NBFC for failure on the part of the NBFC to fulfil the conditions as laid down under 
section 45IA of the RBI Act, 1934. A company, aggrieved by the Reserve Bank's order of 
rejection of application or cancellation of certificate of registration may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government within a period of 30 days.  
Application Forms for Registration 
Necessary application forms for registration will be available at the Regional Offices of 
Department of Supervision (Financial Companies Wing) of the Reserve Bank. NBFCs 
are advised to obtain application forms from the concerned Regional Office having 
jurisdiction over the area where the registered office of the company is located.  
Maintenance of Liquid Assets 
The NBFCs are required to invest, on a daily basis five per cent of their deposits 
outstanding at the end of the last working day of the second preceding quarter. The 
investments will have to be in unencumbered approved securities valued at their market 
price. The Reserve Bank may also prescibe a higher percentage of liquid assets not 
exceeding 25 per cent. The Reserve Bank may fix different percentages of investment 
for different types of companies. For failure to maintain the required percentage of liquid 
assets in the prescribed manner, the Reserve Bank has been empowered to impose a 
penalty at the rate of three per cent per annum above the bank rate on the amount of 
short fall. If the shortfall continues in the subsequent quarter/s, the penalty would be at 
the rate of five per cent per annum above the bank rate on the amount of shortfall for 
subsequent quarters during which the default continues.  Reserve Fund 
Every NBFC is required to create a reserve fund and transfer to it every year an amount 
not less than 20 per cent of its net profit before declaring any dividend. Appropriation 
from the Reserve Fund is permitted only for the purposes specified by the Reserve 
Bank.  
Prudential Norms and Deployment of Funds 
The Reserve Bank has been authorised to determine the policy and issue directions 
from time to time to the NBFCs re garding income recognition, accounting standards, 
classification of assets, provisioning for non-performing assets and capital adequacy. 
The Reserve Bank has also been vested with powers to issue directions to the NBFCs 
regarding the purpose, quantum of loans and advances and other deployment of funds.  
Issue of Directions to NBFCs and Auditors regarding Financial Statements 
The Reserve Bank has been empowered to issue directions to the NBFCs and to their 
auditors regarding matters relating to the profit and loss account, balance sheet and 
books of account, disclosure of liabilities or any other matter. The Reserve Bank has 
also been empowered to get a special audit of any NBFC done, appoint an 
auditor/auditors for the purpose and to issue directions to the auditor/auditors. The 
remuneration of the auditors for conducting such audit will have to be borne by the 
NBFC concerned.  
Prohibition on Acceptance of Deposits and Transfer of Assets  
The Reserve Bank has been empowered to prohibit any NBFC from accepting any 
deposit for violation of any provisions of the RBI Act. Direction may also be issued to an 
NBFC not to sell or transfer any of its assets for a period not exceeding six months from 
the date of the prohibitory order without prior permission from the Reserve Bank.  
Winding up of NBFCs 
The Reserve Bank has been empowered to file petition for winding up of an NBFC in 
certain circumstances as enunciated under the newly introduced provisions of section 
45MC.  
Enforcement of Repayment of Deposit by the Company Law Board 
Every deposit accepted by an NBFC is required to be repaid, unless renewed, as per the 
terms and conditions of the deposit. Where an NBFC fails to repay any deposit, the 
Company Law Board, either on its own or on being approached by a deposi 
tor/depositors, may direct the NBFC to repay the deposit forth with, or within such time 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified.  Nomination Facility  
Nomination facility for deposits held by a non-banking institution has been introduced on 
the lines of bank deposits. Nomination rules are being framed.  
Chapter V 
Penalty 
The Reserve Bank has been empowered to impose penalty on NBFCs for violation of 
the provisions of the RBI Act. For carry ing on business without a certificate of 
registration, the Reserve Bank can impose a fine up to the extent of Rs. 5 lakh or twice 
the amount involved in such contravention, where the amount is quantifiable, whichever 
is more. A continuing default involves a further penalty of up to Rs.25,000 for every day 
after the first day of such default. For any other contravention, a fine not exceeding Rs. 
5,000 can be imposed by the Reserve Bank. Apart from this, carrying on business 
without a certifi cate of registration is an offence punishable with imprisonment of not 
less than one year which may extend to five years and with a fine of not less than one 
lakh rupees which may extend up to Rs. 5 lakh. Non-compliance with the orders of the 
Company Law Board is punishable with imprisonment up to three years and a fine of not 
less than Rs. 50 every day during which such non-compliance continues. If any auditor 
fails to comply with any direction given by the Reserve Bank, he will be punishable with 
a fine up to Rs. 5,000.  
Chapter IIIC 
Acceptance of Deposits by Unincorporated Bodies 
The amended RBI Act has modified the erstwhile provisions of section 45S of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 relating to acceptance of deposits by unincorporated 
bodies. The amended provisions have come into effect from April 1, 1997. As per the 
amended provisions of section 45S of the RBI Act, unincorporated bodies such as, 
individuals, firms or unin corporated associations of individuals have been prohibited 
from accepting any deposit, if :  
i. the business of such unincorporated bodies either wholly or partly includes any of 
the activities of financing, or acquisi tion of securities, letting or delivering of 
goods under hire purchase agreement, managing, conducting or supervising, as 
foreman of chits or kuries.  
ii. the principal business of unincorporated bodies is that of receiving deposits or 
lending in any manner. An individual or a partner of a firm carrying on such 
activities has, however, been permitted to accept deposits from relatives and 
borrow money from certain institutions as specfied in the RBI Act.  
Any person other than a body corporate, who holds any deposit as on April 1, 1997, 
which is not in accordance with the provisions of the RBI Act, will be required to repay 
such deposits either on the maturity of the deposits or within a period of three years from 
April 1, 1997, whichever is earlier. If any person is unable to repay a part of the deposits 
for reasons beyond his control or such repayment will cause extreme hardship to him he should make an application to the Reserve Bank for extension of time for such 
repayment. The Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied, by an order in writing, extend such 
period by a period not exceeding one year subject to such conditions as may be 
specified by it.  
 
For the purpose of the above provisions, the term 'deposit' has been defined in the RBI 
Act to include any receipt of money by way of deposit or loan or in any other form, but 
will not include receipt of money by any person by way of share capital, contribution by 
partners to the capital of a firm, amounts received from banks and specified financial 
institutions, amounts received in the ordinary course of business by way of security 
deposit, dealership deposit, earnest money, advance against orders for goods, 
properties or services, subscription in respect of chit or any amount received from any 
unincorporated body registered under any Act relating to money lending.  
Prohibition on Issue of Advertisements 
Unincorporated bodies are prohibited from issuing any advertisement in any form for 
soliciting deposit with effect from April 1, 1997.  
Penalty 
Receipt of deposit in contravention of the above provisions would amount to an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine 
which may extend to twice the amount of the deposit so received or Rs. 2,000, 
whichever is more, or with both.  
 
It may be mentioned here that in terms of the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1997, accept ance of deposit from public by any person, other 
than a body corporate was prohibited except for personal use. The intention of the 
amendment was, however, not to prohibit individuals, partnership firms and 
unincorporated associations of individuals from accepting deposits or borrowings for 
their own non-financial business. The intention was only to prevent unincorporated 
bodies from accepting deposits for the purpose of lending. The provisions have been 
suitably modified in the amendment Act.  
 
(Alpana Killawala) 
Deputy General Manager  
Press Release : 1996-97/698  
 