` 
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
June 03, 1997 
Report of the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility 
Shri S S Tarapore, Chairman to the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility (CAC) 
today formally presented the Report of the Committee to Dr. C Rangarajan, Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India. While presenting the Report of the Committee, Shri Tarapore 
appreciated the valuable contribution made by each member of the Committee. The 
members of the Committee included Dr. Surjit S. Bhalla, Shri M. G. Bhide, Dr. Kirit 
Parikh and Shri A V Rajwade. Shri Tarapore mentioned that as part of its deliberations, 
the Committee had meetings with several associations/chambers of commerce and 
industry. Shri Tarapore also acknowledged the dedicated support rendered by the 
Secretariat to the Committee. Smt. Usha Thorat, Chief General Manager, Department of 
External Investments and Operations, RBI was the Secretary of the Commit tee who 
along with Shri C.R. Gopalasundaram, General Manager, Exchange Control Department 
and Shri Michael Debabrata Patra, Director, Department of Economic Analysis and 
Policy, RBI formed the Secretariat.  
Dr. Rangarajan placed on record his appreciation for the excellent work done by the 
Committee on CAC and stated that it was indeed commendable that the Committee has 
abided by the timeframe despite the volume and complexity of the job. Dr. Rangarajan 
also stated that the report would be examined expeditiously. The Committee was 
appointed by the Reserve Bank on February 28, 1997 in pursuance of the commitment 
made by the Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaram in his Budget for 1997-98. The 
Reserve Bank had at that time indicated that the Committee will complete its work by 
May 30, 1997. The report was submitted as scheduled on May 30, 1997.  
Terms of reference 
The terms of reference of the Committee were to: (i) review the international experience 
in relation to capital account convertibility (CAC) and to indicate the preconditions for 
CAC, (ii) recommend measures for achieving CAC, (iii) specify the sequence and time 
frame for such measures, and (iv) suggest domestic policy measures and changes in 
institutional framework.  
The outline of the Report 
The Report of the Committee is organised into five Chapters, supported by eleven 
Annexures. Chapter 1 sets out the background against the Committee was appointed 
and the broad approach of the Committee in the context of its terms of reference. The 
macro economic developments in the Indian economy leading up to the appointment of 
the Committee and issues relat ing to CAC, particularly the potential benefits of CAC, are also addressed in this Chapter. Chapter 2 sketches out the international experience 
with CAC. Chapter 3 examines the preconditions/ signposts relevant for the institution of 
CAC in India. Chapter 4 presents the road map for CAC in India with specific focus on 
the timing and sequencing of measures necessary to usher in CAC. A summary of the 
Committee's recommendations is contained in Chapter 5.  
Current status of convertibility 
The Committee has, in its Report, noted that India had already adopted current account 
convertibility in August 1994 by formally accepting the obligations under Article VIII of 
the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Furthermore, CAC is 
already instituted for foreign investors, both direct and portfolio, non resident depositors 
and resident corporates contracting external commercial borrowings (ECB). Controls, 
however, continue to operate on the ability of resident individuals and corporates to send 
capital abroad as also on inflows and outflows of capital associated with banks and non 
bank financial entities.  
International experience 
A review of the international experience with CAC shows that, in general, liberalisation of 
the capital account induces large capital inflows which can cause real appreciation in the 
exchange rate and erode the effectiveness of domestic monetary policy. Furthermore, 
an open capital account imposes tremendous pressures on the financial system and 
brings weaknesses in the financial system into sharper focus. While it is necessary to 
recognise that these weaknesses could precipitate systemic hazards irrespective of 
whether or not CAC is introduced, the move to CAC would demand a strong discipline 
from the financial system and would warrant early rectification of infirmities in the 
system.  
Indian context 
Given the attainment of stable and sustainable growth in India and the progress 
achieved in entrenching structural reforms, the Committee has recommended that the 
time is now appropriate to initiate a move towards CAC in India. It has noted that over a 
period of time capital controls turn ineffective, costly and even distorting. Moreover, there 
are distinct benefits of CAC, such as, availability of a larger capital stock at international 
prices to supplement domestic resources, risk diversification, allocative efficiency and 
improvement in intermediation of financial resources, development of financial markets 
and a disciplining influence on macro economic policies. Accordingly, the Committee has 
recommended that alongside further measures to liberalise capital inflows, it is desirable 
to simultaneously liberalise controls on outflows as a means of contending with capital 
inflows. An early, albeit cautious beginning to allow capital outflows is desirable as the 
system is attuned to a totally rigid band on certain outflows. There is a need to develop 
confidence that some capital outflows, far from being destabilising, would be conducive 
to the overall efficiency of deployment of resources. Moreover, in the context of large 
capital inflows, CAC would relieve pressure on the exchange rate, the monetary 
aggregates and thereby enhance the effectiveness of domestic policies.  
Timetable for CAC in India 
Recognising that there are certain weaknesses in the system and that the entrenchment 
of preconditions can be achieved over a period of time the Committee has 
recommended a phased implementation of CAC over a three year period : Phase I (1997-98), Phase II (1998-99) and Phase III (1999-2000). The implemen tation of 
measures contemplated for each phase should be based on a careful and continuous 
monitoring of certain preconditions/signposts and certain important attendant variables 
identified from the lessons of the international experience and the specifics of the Indian 
situation. The Committee viewed the preconditions/ signposts and the attendant 
variables as processes rather than one-time indicators. Depending on the assessment 
regarding the attainment of these milestones, the timing and sequencing of the 
measures of CAC could be accelerated or decelerated. Furthermore, the Committee has 
recommended that at the end of the three year phasing, stock taking of the progress in 
establishing preconditions/signposts as well as the impact of the measures already 
instituted should be undertaken. CAC is a continuous process and further measures 
could be undertaken thereafter in the light of the experience gained.  
Preconditions/signposts 
The Committee has recommended that fiscal consolidation, a mandated inflation target 
and strengthening of the financial system should be regarded as crucial 
preconditions\signposts for CAC in India.  
Fiscal consolidation 
There should be a reduction in the Centres Gross fiscal deficit to GDP ratio from a 
budgeted 4.5 per cent in 1997-98 to 4.0 per cent in 1998-99 and further to 3.5 per cent in 
1999-2000 accompanied by a reduction in the States' deficit as also a reduction in the 
quasi fiscal deficit. Recognising that the practice of financing the amortisation of 
Government borrowings out of fresh borrowings is clearly unsustainable and would 
inevitably result in a crisis, the Committee has recommended introduction of a 
Consolidated Sinking Fund (CSF) as part of a more transparent fiscal system. The 
Committee has urged that any increase in the profit transfer from the RBI to the 
Government as well as the proceeds from disinvestment should be used entirely towards 
building up a CSF. Furthermore, there should be an early introduction of a system of 
fiscal transparency and accountability on the lines of the New Zealand Fiscal 
Responsibility Act. The Government should set up its own office of public debt. The RBI 
should totally eschew from participating in the primary issues of Government borrowing.  
Mandated inflation rate 
The mandated rate of inflation for the three year period should be an average of 3-5 per 
cent. There should be an early empowering of the RBI on the inflation mandate 
approved by Parliament and only Parliament should alter that mandate. Once the 
mandate is given, RBI should be given freedom to attain the target. There should be 
clear and transparent guidelines on the circumstances under which the mandate could 
be changed. Such a mandate would necessarily need to provide for greater 
independence for the RBI.  
Strengthening of financial system 
The Committee viewed the strengthening of the financial system as the single most 
important precondition to the move to CAC and therefore weaknesses in the financial 
sector need to be addressed early on in the process of CAC. Interest rates should be 
fully deregulated in 1997-98 and there should be no formal or informal interest rate 
controls. The average effective Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR, which was 9.3 per cent in 
April 1997) should be reduced to 8.0 per cent in 1997-98, 6.0 per cent in 1998-99 and further to 3.0 per cent in 1999-2000. Furthermore, drastic measures should be taken to 
bring down gross Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) from the tentative estimate of 13.7 per 
cent of total advances in March 1997 to 12.0 per cent in 1997-98, 9.0 per cent in 1998-
99 and 5.0 per cent in 1999-2000. Noting with concern that some of the weak banks are 
growing at rates faster than the system, the Committee recommended that weak banks 
should be converted into narrow banks, i.e., banks whose incremental resources are 
deployed only in investments in government securities; in extreme cases of weakness, 
restraints should be applied on liability growth.  
Monitoring of attendant variable indicators 
The Committee has also recommended that certain important macro economic 
indicators, i.e., the exchange rate, the balance of payments and the adequacy of 
reserves should be monitored while determining the appropriate timing and sequencing 
of CAC. In the conduct of exchange rate policy, the RBI should have a monitoring band 
of +/- 5 per cent around the neutral Real Effec tive Exchange Rate (REER) and ordinarily 
intervene as and when the REER is outside the band. The neutral REER could be 
changed as warranted by fundamentals but there should be transparency in the 
exchange rate policy i.e., the REER band should be declared, published 
contemporaneously and changes in neutral REER made public. As a broad rule of 
thumb, over the three year period, external sector policies should be designed to ensure 
a rising trend in the Current Receipts (CR) to GDP ratio from the present level of 15 per 
cent and the endeavour should be to reduce the debt service ratio from 25 to 20 per 
cent. The Current Account Deficit (CAD) to GDP ratio would need to be consistent with 
these parameters.  
In the context of CAC, the Committee noted that since capital flows would have a more 
significant effect on the balance of payments, the conventional indicator of reserves in 
terms of import cover does not provide a good measure of the adequacy of reserves. 
The Committee has provided four alternative indicators to be used in the Indian context 
for evaluating the adequacy of reserves. While defining three of these alternative 
measures in terms of imports, debt service payments and volatile capital flows cover 
augmented for leads and lags, the Committee has recommended that to prevent an 
unbridled increase in currency without adequate backing of foreign exchange reserves, a 
minimum Net Foreign Assets (NFA) to currency ratio of 40 per cent should be stipulated 
by law in the RBI Act.  
Preparing the financial system for CAC 
In order to prepare the financial system for CAC the Committee has made several 
recommendations for bringing about a level playing field between various participants in 
the financial system, removing market segmentation, uniform treatment of resident and 
non-resident liabilities for purposes of reserve requirements, improving risk management 
systems in the financial system, introduction of more stringent capital adequacy 
standards and prudential standards, effective supervisory system and greater autonomy 
for banks and FIs.  
Phased liberalisation of capital controls 
The Committee's recommendations for a phased liberalisation of controls on capital 
outflows and inflows over the three year period which have been set out in detail in a 
tabular form in Chapter 4 of the Report, inter alia, include :  i. Indian Joint Ventures/Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (JVs/WOSs) should be allowed 
to invest up to US $ 50 million in ventures abroad at the level of the Authorised 
Dealers (ADs) in phase I with transparent and comprehensive guidelines set out 
by the RBI. The existing requirement of repatriation of the amount of investment 
by way of dividend, etc., within a period of 5 years may be removed. 
Furthermore, JVs/WOSs could be allowed to be set up by any party and not be 
restricted to only exporters/exchange earners.  
ii. Exporters/exchange earners may be allowed 100 per cent retention of earnings 
in Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) accounts with complete flexibility 
in operation of these accounts including cheque writing facility in Phase I.  
iii. Individual residents may be allowed to invest in assets in financial market abroad 
up to $ 25,000 in Phase I with progres sive increase to US $ 50,000 in Phase II 
and US $ 100,000 in Phase III. Similar limits may be allowed for non-residents 
out of their non-repatriable assets in India.  
iv. SEBI registered Indian investors may be allowed to set funds for investments 
abroad subject to overall limits of $ 500 million in Phase I, $ 1 billion in Phase II 
and $ 2 billion in Phase III.  
v. Banks may be allowed much more liberal limits in regard to borrowings from 
abroad and deployment of funds outside India. Borrowings (short and long term) 
may be subject to an overall limit of 50 per cent of unimpaired Tier I capital in 
Phase I, 75 per cent in Phase II and 100 per cent in Phase III with a sub-limit for 
short term borrowing. In case of deployment of funds abroad, the requirement of 
section 25 of Banking Regulation Act and the prudential norms for open position 
and gap limits would apply.  
vi. Foreign direct and portfolio investment and disinvestment should be governed by 
comprehensive and transparent guidelines, and prior RBI approval at various 
stages may be dispensed with subject to reporting by ADs. All non-residents may 
be treated on par for purposes of such investments.  
vii. In order to develop and enable the integration of forex, money and securities 
market, all participants in the spot market should be permitted to operate in the 
forward markets; FIIs, non-residents and non-resident banks may be allowed 
forward cover to the extent of their assets in India; all India Financial Institutions 
(FIs) fulfilling requisite criteria should be allowed to become full-fledged ADs; 
currency futures may be intro duced with screen based trading and efficient 
settlement systems; participation in money markets may be widened, market 
segmentation removed and interest rates deregulated; the RBI should withdraw 
from the primary market in Government securities; the role of primary and 
satellite dealers should be increased; fiscal incentives should be provided for 
individuals investing in Government securities; the Government should set up its 
own office of public debt.  
viii. There is a strong case for liberalising the overall policy regime on gold; Banks 
and FIs fulfilling well defined criteria may be allowed to participate in gold 
markets in India and abroad and deal in gold products.  
FEMA 
The Committee has also stated that the timing and sequencing of capital account 
convertibility would be greatly facilitated by the proposed changes in the legislative 
framework governing foreign exchange transactions as envisaged in the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act(FEMA).  
(Alpana Killawala) 
Deputy General Manager  
Press Release : 1996-97/757  
 