` œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä  ?¸ÿˆÅ 
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿ ?¸ƒÄ 400 001 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
 
Feb 18,1997 
 
Report on trend and progress of banking in india, 1995-96 (July-June) 
 
The Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 1995- 96 (July-June) presents a comprehensive review of the 
various issues and developments relating to banking system in India in 1995-96, and subsequently upto September 30, 
1996..  
The Indian banking system faced several tests and challenges in 1995-96. While deposit resources of banks grew 
moderately, credit growth was also strong. The year also witnessed two constraints on the banking system's profitability 
viz., the depreciation in the value of Government securities due to an increase in the mark-to-market proportion and 
increase in wage bill following the wage accord. The overall situation of 1995-96 was also distorted due to the losses of the 
Indian Bank. Exclud ing these factors, the overall performance of banks showed considerable improvement; 24 out of 27 
public sector banks recorded operating profit in 1995-96.  
The year witnessed continuation of financial sector reforms aimed at cleaning the balance sheets of banks and 
strengthening their viability and resilience. As a result, the magnitude of non-performing assets came down. Ninetten(as 
against 13 last year) out of 27 public sector banks attained the benchmark of eight per cent capital adequacy as at the end 
of March 1996.  
A major agenda of the financial sector reforms in 1995-96 was de-regulation of interest rates on both sides of the balance 
sheets of banks and reduction in statutory pre-emptions in the form of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity 
Ratio (SLR). The challenges faced by banks include prudent asset- liability management, credit risk management, customer 
service, technological upgradation besides transparent accounting and internal audit system.  
The regulatory framework of banks and non-banks was made relatively even, with deregulation of deposit interest rates of 
non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) which met certain pruden tial and rating requirements. The banking system was 
subject to greater competition.  
There are four chapters in the Report besides an annexure (giving chronological developments in the financial sector re 
forms for the last five years). Chapter I entitled 'Banking Developments and Policy Perspectives' provides an account of the 
important policy announcements in the financial sector and also brings out the performance of Indian banks in the context 
of the ongoing financial sector reforms.  
The highlights of this chapter include an analysis of issues relating to rural credit, financial sector reforms, non-performing 
assets, profitability of banks and issues in banking technology and modernisation. The emerging banking scenario is 
presented at the end of the chapter. Chapter II entitled 'Commercial Banking' discusses, in a comprehensive fashion, the 
various issues and operational aspects of commer cial banks in India during 1995-96. It also presents a compara tive 
analysis of bank group-wise working results of all scheduled commercial banks.  
The important factors which had a bearing on their performance are identified in this chapter. Chapter III covers 
`Developments in Co-operative Banking', especially its increasing interface with the rural economy. This chapter analyses 
the progress of the co-operative credit movement, NA BARD's functional relationship with the co-operative institu tions and 
the Reserve Bank. Chapter IV entitled 'Financial Institutions' discusses the relative role of banks and financial institutions in 
the financial system. This chapter examines developments in the financial sector, viz., term lending institu tions, investment 
institutions, mutual funds and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs). Prudential and regulatory issues of NBFCs are 
also dealt with in this chapter.  
Alpana Killawala 
Deputy General Manager 