Making bill finance available at interest rates lower than loan or cash credit,
freedom to individual banks to lay down norms, abolition of stamp duty on bills of
 up to 182 days and exemption from stamp duty to financial institutions and
registered non-banking finance companies are some of the recommendations of the
Working Group on Discounting of Bills by Banks.  The Working Group has also
recommended allowing borrowers to discount bills drawn under letters of credit with any
bank of their choice outside the existing consortium/multiple banking arrangements and
creation of new alternatives to bill financing as well as introduction of a credit insurance
scheme to ensure that domestic receivables are on lines similar to those prevailing
abroad.
The Working Group was set up by the Reserve Bank of India in December 1999
to examine the possibility of extending bills discounting facility to services sector
especially industries such as information technology, software services, travel and
tourism, etc. The Working Group submitted its report to the Reserve Bank of India on
September 7, 2000. The Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri
K.R. Ramamoorthy, Chairman, Vysya Bank Ltd. and comprised members drawn from
commercial banks and different central office departments of the Reserve Bank of India.
The Group co-opted representatives from trade, industry and services sector as additional
members to have the benefit of their views and to ensure that the findings of the Group
are relevant to the trade, Industry and services sector.
In view of services sector transforming the economic profile of the country and
being poised to register tremendous growth and contribute significantly to overall
strength of the economy, the Group undertook a detailed scrutiny of the key issues
involved in bill financing and examined the possibility of strengthening the existing bill
discounting mechanism and extend its scope to services sector.
The Group has made several recommendations duly taking into account the
Indian context in respect of bill financing, Bankers’ Acceptance, and the scope for
• Bill finance being the preferred style of credit form the bankers’ point of view should
carry interest lower than loan or cash credit, which is in line with international
• In respect of bill transactions, individual bank should be given the freedom to lay
down norms for satisfying themselves about the genuineness of underlying
commercial transactions and/or the movement of goods.
• Banks should evolve the system of “value-dating” of clients account
• usance 
• The exemption from stamp duty should be made available to bills discounted by
• All corporate and other commercial entities who have a turnover above a threshold
level may be mandated to disclose the “aging schedule” of their overdue payables in
• Borrowers may be permitted to discount bills drawn under Letters of Credit with any
September 28, 2000
bank of their choice, outside the existing consortium/multiple banking arrangements
their annual reports as well as in their periodical reports to their banks
Financial Institutions and Registered Non-Bank Finance Companies.
upto 182 days may be abolished Stamp duty for all bills of 
practice.
extending Bill financing to services sector. The important recommendations in brief are:
usance
RBI Working Group on Discount of Bills submits Report• New alternatives to bill financing like Invoice Financing and Secured Fixed Rate
Note on the lines of asset -backed Commercial Paper, prevalent in developed markets
• A Credit Insurance Scheme for ensuring domestic receivables on lines similar to the
ones prevailing abroad may be introduced.
• Bankers’ Acceptance (BA) may be introduced in the Indian market to finance import,
export and domestic trade transactions. However, care has to be taken to ensure that
• Borrowing clients who enjoyed working capital limits of Rs.10 crore and above and
whose rating with the bank has been consistently satisfactory may be allowed 
against the Working Capital Demand Loan (WCDL) component on the basis of the
• Banks may be permitted to entertain purchase/discount of bills drawn by service
providers on their debtors, subject to the satisfaction of the banker that the service has
The Group has also considered it appropriate to briefly advert to one of the key
emerging trends in the world of business, viz, the use of inter-net as a potent  cost
effective tool for electronic commerce (e-commerce). Looking at the wave of optimism
being shared in the developed markets on the future potential of e-commerce and their
preparedness to meet them, the Group has recommended that an expert group drawn from
the fields of technology, banking and corporate finance may be constituted to prepare the
blue-print for meeting the e-commerce challenges that may be thrown up in the financial
The full text of the report of the Working Group on Bills Discounting by Banks
website (
Suggestions/comments may be sent to The Chief General Manager, Industrial and
Export Credit Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office Building, 12th floor,
Shahid Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai-400001 or through Fax at 2660407, 2661256 or e-
Release : 2000-2001/482
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
mail - rbibiecd@giasbm01.vsnl.net.in
www.rbi.org.in) has been placed on the RBI 
sector of the country.
been rendered.
favour of the lending bank called “Bank Paper” tradable promissory note in 
drawals
BAs are issued to cover only genuine trade transactions
may be introduced. Factoring services could also be revitalized.