June 10, 2000
The National Payments Council under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, Shri
S.P.Talwar met on June 09, 2000 to discuss the latest developments in the Payments System
and the future possibilities. The Council members welcomed the passing of the Information
Technology (IT) Bill and the grant of one transponder on INSAT 3- B  which will augment
the capacity of the Indian Financial Network (INFINET). The Council reviewed the ongoing
initiatives for implementing the Centralised Funds Management System (CFMS), Real Time
Gross Settlement System (RTGS), Securities Settlement System (SSS) and the Structured
Financial Messaging Solution (SFMS), and urged that the implementation be expedited as
quickly as possible – within the next one year. On the legal issues, the Council suggested that
pending the required amendments in the Negotiable Instruments Act and the Reserve Bank of
India Act and passing of Electronic Funds Transfer Act, the contractual methods could be
The Council decided that for having drafts of amendments to the Negotiable Instruments Act,
the Reserve Bank of India Act and of Electronic Funds Transfer Act, an appropriate
The Council agreed that intra-day liquidity would have to be provided under RTGS
framework. It was also accepted that the discipline of intra-day liquidity facility should be
strictly observed, with penalties in place to act as deterrents for breach of discipline. The
Council felt that the working of 
The Council recommended that a scenario building exercise may be incorporated in the work
relating to the interface between the Payments System and Monetary Policy conduct. 
Council urged that the Report of the Advisory Group on the Core Principles on Payments and
Settlement Systems, as and when concluded, may be examined by the Task Force on
Payment and Settlement System Oversight and the results of the Task Force’s examination
may be placed for discussions of the Council in one of its future meetings.  The Council also
appreciated the efforts put in by the Reserve Bank to promote the development of electronic
Release : 1999-2000/1663
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
retail payment modes, including SMART Cards.
The
intra-day liquidity should be reviewed periodically.
consultant may be appointed.
utilised to ensure that financial transactions take place in electronic mode.
Meeting of the National Payments Council