RBI releases Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India - 1999-2000
November 15, 2000
The  Reserve Bank  of  India  today released its Report on Trend and Progress of
Banking in India -  1999-2000. The Report gives a detailed account of the performance of
commercial banks, cooperative banks, development financial institutions and non-bank
finance companies.  In addition, the Report also gives policies and regulatory
environment under which these institutions operate.
The first chapter captures the banking developme nts and perspectives.  In
particular, attention is focussed on policy developments ,  financial performance and
perspectives.  Chapter II while discussing the developments in commercial banking also
gives an analysis of the financial performance of scheduled commercial banks and 
various banking groups, viz., public sector banks, nationalised banks, including, regional
rural banks, foreign banks, old private sector banks.  Performance of various banking
groups in terms of a few important balance sheet indicators, viz., operating profits, net
profits and non-performing assets also find a place in this chapter.
Developments in coopereative banking including the role played by the National
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) in the provision of refinance
facility are discussed in Chapter III.
The performance of various financial institutions, namely, IDBI, ICICI, IFCI, is
analysed together with the performance of mutual funds in Chapter IV.   A notable
feature of this chapter in this year's Report is the detailed analysis of assets/liabilities of
the developmental financial institutions and the financial performance of all India
In Chapter V ,  various regulatory measures initiated during the year with
reference to non-banking  financial companies along with a detailed account of
developments pertaining to their deposits, asset, interest rates structure and 
The Report is available on the RBI )
Press 
release : 2000-2001/729
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
www.rbi.org.in website (
distribution are given.
regioin-wise
financial institutions.
of