DRG Study:
Productivity in Major Manufacturing
Industries in India: 1973-74 TO 1997-98
August 30, 2000
The Development Research Group (DRG) in the Reserve Bank of India has
brought out a study entitled “Productivity in Major Manufacturing Industries in India:
1973-74 to 1997-98”. The twentieth in the DRG Study Series, this Study is authored by
 , Shri Anand  and Shri David Sinate.
The DRG Studies series have an accent on policy-oriented research.  They are
released for wide circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among
professional economists and policy makers on subjects of current interest. he views
expressed in these studies are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the
After a brief adj ustment to the unprecedented balance of payments crisis of 1990-
92, the Indian economy has, in the 1990s, experienced robust and stable growth.  With
the real growth rate averaging 6.4 per cent over the decade, India has emerged as one of
the fastest growing economies in the developing world.  Accumulating evidence of
productivity as an important source of growth has generated a debate on the measurement
and analysis of productivity changes, particularly at the industry level.  Productivity is
also regarded as a key determinant of price and cost competitiveness, both at home and in
international markets.  Macroeconomic policies the world over are being increasingly
fashioned around a recognition of the crucial role of productivity in economic
The present DRG study provides the most recent estimates of productivity –
single factor productivity, total productivity and total factor productivity – in the major
manufacturing industries in India which also make a significant contribution to India’s
exports.  In doing so, the study addresses various theoretical and methodological issues
relating to the concept and measurement of productivity.   It also presents cross country
comparisons with a view to situating the level of productivity, its movement over time
The principal findings of the study are that labour productivity in the six
manufacturing industries selected for study has been higher than that for the
manufacturing sector as a whole.  In fact, labour productivity has been rising at a faster
rate than capital productivity.  International comparison shows that while labour
productivity in Indian industries has been rising faster than in some 
countries, the level of labour productivity in India is low and convergence with
international levels is difficult in the near future.  In terms of total factor productivity, the
Indian manufacturing sector has recorded positive rates of growth, particularly since the
second half of the 1980s, which compare east Asian economies.
The study concludes that increasing productivity in Indian industries, with
industry-specific strategies, is an imperative in order to raise standards of living in the
country and to make Indian products globally competitive.  Indian industries will have to
plan for economising the use of inputs and curtailing costs so as to remain competitive in
the global trading environment.
Press Release No. 2000-2001/318
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
http://www.rbi.org.in website The study is available on RBI 
favourably with those of 
industrialised
and the productivity gap in Indian industries in an international perspective.
performance.
Reserve Bank.
Prakash Trivedi Pushpa Prof. 