RBI 
June 30, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India today announced rationalisation of some of the regulations
and other measures as applicable to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and
 Provisioning norms in respect of lease and hire purchase assets have been
rationalised to encourage the NBFCs to continue to extend the facility against
second hand assets as part of their contribution to the economic development of
 The NBFCs may obtain and keep on their records a copy of the passport, ration
card, Election ID card, identification by an existing depositor, etc., as an evidence
for identification of new depositors.
 Residuary Non-Banking Companies have been permitted to make investment in
the schemes of mutual funds approved by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India along with the schemes of Unit Trust of India.  The floor ceiling on interest
rates payable by these companies has also been lowered down by two 
points.
 NBFCs have been permitted to accept deposits from the relatives of the Directors
subject to adequate disclosure to the depositors in this regard, outside the purview
 The formats of all the statutory returns to be submitted by the non-banking
financial companies, nidhis, residuary non-banking companies and chit fund
companies for their reporting in quarterly, half-yearly and annual returns, as
rationalised with a view
to ascertaining supervisory information from the returns to the extent possible and
for facilitating electronic processing of these returns to enable the Bank to take
The Reserve Bank has also advised all the registered NBFCs to brand their Certificates of
Registration by the words as `Deposit Taking Companies' or `Non-Deposit Taking
Company' so as to avoid any possible misrepresentation by any company registered as a
non-public deposit taking company and accepting public deposits.  The Bank has further
advised that public deposits should be accessed only by those NBFCs which have been
The detailed notifications and the relevant circular are being placed on the Reserve
website at .
P.V. Sadanandan
Release : 1999-2000/1747
Press 
Assistant Manager
www.rbi.org.in Bank's 
RNBCs. specifically permitted to accept public deposits and 
expeditious steps to address the concerns wherever necessary.
applicable, under the Reserve Bank regulations have been 
(v)
of public deposits.
(iv)
percentage
(iii)
(ii)
the country.
(i)
RNBCs).  The changes made are - Residuary Non-Banking Companies (
rationalise NBFC Regulations