The Reserve Bank of India has extended the term of the Regulations Review
Authority (RRA) for a further period of one year from April 1, 2000.  The extension has
been extended to RRA with a view to providing some more time to general public,
to them through this scheme and to completing the assigned tasks to the RRA.  It may be
recalled that the RRA was set up in the Reserve Bank of India in 1999, with Dr. Y.V.
, Deputy Governor as RRA, for reviewing the Reserve Bank’s rules, regulations,
reporting systems, etc., in the light of suggestions received from general public, market
participants and users of services of the Reserve Bank.  The RRA completed one year of
may send their suggestions to the Reserve Bank of India, Regulations Review Authority,
P.O. Box No. 10007, Central Office Building, 16 Floor, Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
Mumbai-400 001 .(e-mail : , Fax : (91)(22)2662105).  The details of the
350 suggestions.  The suggestions pertained to the entire gamut of operations of the
Reserve Bank. Implementation of the accepted suggestions has paved way for
streamlining several existing procedures in the Reserve Bank, particularly in its public
dealing departments and improving its customer service.  The suggestions have also
compelled a review of the Reserve Bank’s reporting systems and have resulted in
reducing a number of redundant returns to the benefit of the users of services of the
compilation of subjectwise master circulars in a manual form by merging quite a large
number of circulars issued over the years on a particular subject into one circular.  When
ready, this would help the users of services of the Reserve Bank to get all current
instructions on a particular subject at one place instead of referring to quite a large
number of circulars.  Some master circulars on subjects, such as, loans and advances,
,  prudential norms and provisioning, bank frauds, export finance,
Another noteworthy achievement was decentralisation of the work of fixing
service charges which was so far being attended to by the Indian Banks'
Association(IBA) and the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI) for
commercial banks and authorised dealers in foreign exchange, respectively. Individual
banks now themselves work out and levy service charges based on the cost of providing
 done away with sample test checking of newly printed MICR Instruments at
 passed on regulations  over Money Market Mutual funds to Securities Exchange
 granted general permission to mutual funds for issuing units to foreign
.1
institutional investors.
(iii)
Board of India.
(ii)
centres before putting them into use; cheque processing MICR 
(i)
Reserve  Bank has : The 
are : Other suggestions that are implemented 
services.
finalised. priority sector lending, are currently being 
statutory audit of banks
One of the important achievements of the RRA was initiating the work relating to
to be more responsive to the needs of its customers.
an awareness in the Reserve Bank Reserve Bank. More importantly, the RRA has created 
applications which contained more than During the year, the scheme received 200 
Performance Review
www.rbi.org.in website at RRA scheme are available on RBI 
rra@rbi.org.in
th
Members of public, market participants and users of services of the Reserve Bank
its existence on March 31, 2000.
Reddy
market participants, users of services of the Reserve Bank to avail of the facility extended
April 7, 2000
RBI extends RRA term by one year 
 decided that the banks should pay interest at the rate as applicable for appropriate
tenor of fixed deposit for the period of delay beyond 10/14 days in collection of
2 per cent above the fixed deposit rate applicable for abnormal delay caused by
 worked out a procedure for dissemination of timely information of foreign
institutional investors(FII) investments in Indian companies through the RBI web
 
 
2
Release : 1999/2000/1356 Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
Begun making available information to general public through email on demand. (viii)
transactions.
begun a review of its regulations and reporting systems relating to current account (vii)
site to facilitate free trading in shares on stock exchanges by FIIs.
(vi)
the branch in collection of outstation instruments.
outstation instruments.  Further, banks should also pay penal interest at the rate of
(v)
irrespective of the amount involved in the account of a deceased customer.
withdrawn the requirement of obtaining succession certificate from the legal heirs (iv)