Working Group on Consolidated Accounting
The Reserve Bank of India has set up a multi-disciplinary working group to
look into the introduction of consolidated accounting and other quantitative
techniques of consolidated supervision of bank groups. The composition of the
1. Vipin 
    Chartered Accountant
    Member, Central Board of Directors,
2. 
3. Rao
4. B.D.Sumitra
5. 
6. Nagesh 
    ICICI Ltd.
7. 
The Group has been set up against the backdrop of the renewed focus on empowering
supervisors to undertake consolidated supervision of bank groups in recent times. The
renewed focus on consolidated supervision is following the failure of large
international banks triggered by the operations of their subsidiary ventures and by the
concerns arising out of the entry of banks into other lines of business. The Core
Principles of Effective Banking Supervision issued by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS) have underscored this requirement as an independent
principle which requires that bank supervisors have the  ability to supervise banking
groups on a consolidated basis. In India, with diversification, banks and financial
institutions now have both financial and non-financial subsidiaries. It was, therefore,
    Department of Banking Supervision
    Reserve Bank of India
    Deputy General Manager
Member - Secretary Narain Aditya Shri 
    Joint General Manager
Member Pinge Shri 
    Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    President
Member Sitharaman Shri G. 
    State Bank of India
    Chief general Manager
Member Shri 
    Department of Banking Operations and Development
    Reserve Bank of India
    Chief General Manager
Member Subba Shri P V 
    Department of Banking Supervision
    Reserve Bank of India
    Chief General Manager-in-charge
Member Khetarpaul Shri K L 
    Reserve Bank of India
Chairman Mallik Shri 
Working Group is:
to Facilitate Consolidated Supervisionfelt necessary to align the Reserve Bank's approach with that prevalent internationally,
1. examine the feasibility of introducing consolidated accounting for
groups in which banks are either parents or subsidiaries in line with
2. specify ( i) the scope and (ii) the techniques to be used for
consolidation of accounts and recommend the introduction or
adoption of any accounting standards for this purpose.
3. recommend the introduction of any other quantitative methods such
as group prudential norms to facilitate consolidated supervision,
revenue recognition and reporting of statement of changes in the
financial position of the group.
4. outline the sequencing of the introduction of consolidated
5. specify the legislative amendments which would be required for the
introduction of consolidated accounting and other quantitative
methods.
Press Release No.2000-2001/707
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
The Group is expected to submit its report within six months.
accounting and other quantitative methods.
international best practices.
The Group will:
of which consolidated accounting is an integral part.