Reserve Bank of India's Statement on 
In the past four weeks or so, for reasons which are not entirely clear (and which may
presumably be related to prevailing conditions in the international equity and currency markets),
foreign exchange markets in India have shown considerable uncertainty and exaggerated speculation
about RBI’s intentions regarding the level of the exchange rate of the rupee. In order to reduce these
uncertainties, as in similar situations in the past, RBI has decided to introduce some measures. It may
also be appropriate to clarify RBI stand on some of the issues that have figured prominently in the
Despite explanations by the RBI in its annual and half-yearly Policy Statements as well as in
previous statements on exchange rate matters, there is some speculation among commentators and
market participants about RBI “targeting” a specific exchange rate and what that rate is. RBI would
reiterate once again that it does not,  it does not, target a particular value of the rupee in relation
to the US dollar. The often cited round numbers, such as, "Rs.42", "Rs.43", or "Rs.44" simply have no
significance for the management of the exchange rate by the RBI. Nor does RBI recognise any level
such as “lowest ever reached in the past” or “lowest last year” or any such dividing line. While these
concepts have some popular and journalistic appeal, it simply has no relevance for the management of
exchange rate or any other economic variable. For example, even during period of very low inflation,
every week, WPI and CPI could be projected to have reached the “highest level” even though the
incremental change may be very small but this is meaningless. Unfortunately, in regard to exchange
rates, it is not unusual to project even a minor change of say, a few paise, or even less than 0.25 per
cent, as a major movement with important implications for future trends. This naturally affects the
sentiments and behaviour of other market participants and non-experts. This excessive sensitivity to
minor changes in value of the currency is unwarranted and inconsistent with the significance attached
The exclusive focus by expert commentators and media on US dollar exchange rate gives a
misleading impression of what is happening to the value of the rupee in relation to other key
currencies. For example, in the last one month, Rupee has actually strengthened by 3.3 per cent against
Euro, and by 5.2 per cent against Pound Sterling. In relation to Japanese Yen, it depreciated only by
1.4 per cent, which was similar to the movement in relation to US dollar. Over the calendar year,
however, rupee strengthened against yen by 3.4 per cent. The excessive focus on US dollar is
unwarranted in considering the behaviour of the rupee (Please see Annexure for movements of rupee
Similarly, clarity is warranted in viewing movements in the level of foreign exchange reserves.
RBI’s foreign currency assets are held in different convertible currencies such as US dollar, Euro,
Pound Sterling and Japanese Yen. These reserves are converted into US dollar at the end of every
week by using closing exchange rates prevailing in the New York market for that week. Thus, as per
best international practice, valuation loss/gain is fully reflected every week in the reserve movements.
It is, therefore, not correct to look at this movement and derive conclusion about RBI’s exchange rate
For the convenience of experts and commentators and to encourage informed judgement and
debate on the external sector issues, RBI provides as much information as possible on currency
movements of the rupee vis-à-vis all major currencies on a daily basis as well as RBI operations and
liabilities in  reserves through its regular weekly and monthly publications. RBI's policy
approach on various relevant issues is also articulated through its annual/half yearly monetary policy
statements as well as annual publications. Experts, commentators and others interested in 
markets and RBI operations are encouraged to refer to these publications which are also available on
RBI 
Reserve Bank's total foreign exchange reserves are US $ 37.6 billion as on May 12, 2000. In
the financial year 1999-2000, India's foreign exchange reserves increased by US $ 5,546 million (or
more than US $ 5.5 billion) despite several uncertainties including sharp increase in oil prices and
Website which is updated everyday.
forex
forex
intentions. The figures for net purchases and sales are published in RBI bulletin every month.
in relation to major currencies for various periods last year.)
by commentators to such marginal movements in exchange rates of other international currencies.
repeat
recent comments about RBI’s intention.
Forex MarketsKargil developments. At their current levels country's foreign exchange reserves are comfortable and
In the light of recent developments in the foreign exchange market, as on some previous
 It has been decided, as a temporary measure, to impose interest rate surcharge of 50 per
cent of the lending rate on import finance with effect from May 26, 2000. The interest
rate surcharge will be phased out as early as possible. As in the past, essential
categories such as export-related imports, bulk imports in respect of crude oil,
petroleum products, fertilisers, edible oil and other essential commodities imported
 Reserve Bank of India will meet partially or fully the Government debt service
 Arrangements are also being made to meet, fully or partially, the foreign exchange
 Further, the Reserve Bank will continue to sell dollars through SBI in order to augment
supply in the market, or intervene directly, as considered necessary to meet any
temporary demand-supply imbalances. All the transactions by Reserve Bank of India
will be at the prevailing market rate.
 Exporters are advised not to delay repatriation of export proceeds beyond the due date.
In order to discourage any delay in realisation of export proceeds, it has been decided
that in respect of overdue export bills, banks will charge, with effect from May 26,
2000, interest at 25 per cent per annum (minimum) from the date the bill falls due for
payment.
 As per usual market practice, FIIs will no doubt continue to take their own decisions in
regard to reducing or increasing their stake in India's equity markets. While RBI
welcomes these flows, it would also like to ensure that those FIIs which wish to reduce
their investments can do so as easily as possible at prevailing market rates. As in the
past, Authorised Dealers, acting on behalf of these FIIs are free to approach RBI to
procure foreign exchange at the prevailing market rate. Depending on market
conditions, RBI would either sell the foreign exchange directly or advise the concerned
bank to buy it in the market.
 Banks are advised to enter into transactions in the forex market only on the basis of
genuine requirements and not for the purpose of building up speculative positions. RBI
Release : 1999/2000/1576
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
At present no further monetary tightening or administrative measures are being contemplated.
would monitor the position closely.
(vii)
(vi)
(v)
(iv)
requirements for import of crude oil by the Indian Oil Corporation.
(iii)
payments directly, as considered necessary.
(ii)
through Government agencies will be exempted from interest surcharge.
(i)
occasions, the Reserve Bank of India has decided to take the following actions:
Measures
more than adequate to meet any genuine requirements of foreign exchange.Movement in the Value of the Indian Rupee
Year to Year : The Rupee appreciated 4.8 per cent against the Pound sterling. It
(Over May 21, 1999) appreciated 13.9 per cent against the Euro. It depreciated 2.8 per cent
 : Rupee appreciated 7.1 per cent against the Pound sterling. It
appreciated 10.2 per cent against the Euro. It appreciated 3.4 per cent
1999) against the Japanese yen. It depreciated by 1.1 per cent against the US
 : The Rupee appreciated 6.0 per cent against the Pound sterling. It
(Over March 31, 2000) appreciated 5.0 per cent against the Euro. It appreciated 0.9 per cent
against the Japanese yen. It depreciated by 0.8 per cent against the US
Month on Month : Rupee appreciated 5.2 per cent against the Pound sterling. It
(Over April 20, 2000) appreciated 3.3 per cent against the Euro. It depreciated by 0.8 per cent
against the US dollar. It depreciated 1.4 per cent against the Japanese yen.
 The
dollar.
Financial Year
dollar.
(Over December 31
 The Calendar Year
Yen.
against the US dollar. It depreciated 16.0 per cent against the Japanese
Annexure