February 17, 2000
The second review meeting by the Reserve Bank with bankers was held today in
continuation of the consultative practice adopted by it last year. The meeting was
jointly conducted by Shri S.P.Talwar, Dr.Y.V.Reddy and Shri Jagdish Capoor,
Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank and was attended by 
Executives of select public sector banks, new and old private banks and foreign
banks. Various issues discussed with the bankers included entry of banks and
financial institutions into insurance business, investments in SLR and non-SLR
portfolio, progress in implementation of risk management system, flow of credit
to agriculture and  Credit Card and implementation of  Gram
 , progress in the recovery of  and bank advances against
The Reserve Bank had earlier circulated draft guidelines for entry of banks and
FIs into insurance business.  The draft guidelines along with the feedback
received from various sources, including banks, institutions and the media, were
discussed at the meeting. There was a consensus among banks and FIs that the
norms should be sufficiently stringent and should allow only sound banks and FIs
to diversify into insurance sector.  Some banks, however, expressed a view that
the 30 per cent ceiling proposed to be prescribed by the Reserve Bank on
participation by banks and FIs in the joint venture may pose difficulties in
ensuring their management control over the venture.  Some FIs suggested that as
they were not covered under the Banking Regulation Act, it might be desirable to
permit them to invest in insurance ventures, subject to the IRDA Regulations. It
was also felt that as far as purely fee-based insurance business was concerned ,
banks and FIs should be able to undertake this without any restriction, based on
commercial considerations.  On the basis of the discussions held and also on the
suggestions received from various sources, the Reserve Bank  will  finalise the
guidelines in due course.
The Reserve Bank had issued comprehensive guidelines on risk management
systems in banks, covering broad contours for management of credit and other
risks which serve as a benchmark.  Banks were specifically exhorted to improve
their existing credit risk management systems by upgrading the credit scoring
techniques, undertaking migration analysis to assess the portfolio quality and
rapid portfolio review and stress tests to evaluate the impact of volatility in
external factors on the loan book.
Banks with international presence were advised to create necessary infrastructure
for adopting credit risk modelling for estimating potential credit losses and
allocating economic capital.  They were also asked to introduce a loan review
mechanism to bring about qualitative improvement in credit administration and
pre- emption of asset quality problems in future.  The risk evaluation in respect of
investments in Non-SLR securities should be broad-based and greater focus
Banks should also evolve suitable techniques for risk aggregation and allocating
economic capital on the basis of risk inherent in various lines of business.  Banks
were advised to chart specific strategies and impart training to their officers to
The Report of Informal Group on Valuation of Banks’ Investments Portfolio was
discussed.  The banks broadly endorsed the proposals of the Group. They,
however, desired that the Reserve Bank might continue to indicate the yield-to-
1
should be given to inter-bank exposures.
improve the existing risk management practices.
shares.
NPAs Yojana Swarojgar
Swarnajayanti Kisan
CMDs/Chief
Rbi takes Review Meeting with Bankersmaturity (YTM) for this year and from the next year, the possibility of Primary
Dealers Association of India suggesting YTM might be explored without
prejudice to the freedom of individual banks contemplated in the draft proposals.
The Reserve Bank indicated that the final guidelines would be issued in a
fortnight.
The draft guidelines for valuation of non-SLR investments were also discussed.
The method of classification of debentures as an `advance’ or `investment’ for
purposes of provisioning was considered appropriate. The banks were asked to
furnish any further comments within a week’s time to enable the Reserve Bank to
issue the guidelines quickly. The Reserve Bank conveyed the importance of
prudential aspects while banks/financial institutions consider making investments
The meeting also discussed the recent concerns expressed in various quarters
regarding the banks’ role in financing stock brokers and individuals against shares
in the context of various steps initiated by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India to check the volatility in the stock market. It was mentioned by bankers that
while the banking system in the aggregate is not overextended, some banks were
more liberal than others in issuing guarantees to brokers towards meeting margin
requirements of the stock exchanges.  Some of the banks which are active in the
area explained the safeguards observed by them and indicated that they are
continuously undertaking internal reviews.  Some banks also expressed that they
do not see any serious cause for concern from the banking side though there may
be significant flow of funds from other sources to stock market.
Banks informed the Reserve Bank that they were also inclined to be cautious in
financing IPOs and issuing of guarantees on behalf of stock brokers.  Banks
explained their intention to internally review matters relating to lending margins
and fixing prudential exposure limits.   The Reserve Bank appreciated the internal
review mechanisms being set up by banks.  The Reserve Bank indicated that the
matter will be reviewed and regulatory measures, generally to cover all banks or
The draft proposals for introducing a Liquidity Adjustment Facility, in the light of
the Narasimham Committee’s recommendations, were considered.  The bankers
broadly endorsed the approach, especially implementation of the scheme in
stages.
In the context of repos market, the suggestion made by a Sub Group of the
Technical Advisory Committee on Money and Government Securities Market
(TACMGSM) for setting up a clearing corporation was brought to the notice of
A review of the banks’ performance in extending credit to agriculture and issue of
Kisan Credit Cards was made.  It was observed that there was improvement in
achievement of targets set by banks under Special Agricultural Credit Plans.  The
overall performance of public sector banks regarding loans to agriculture as on
last Friday of September, 1999 was, however, at 16.16 per cent of net bank credit
as against the prescribed target of 18 per cent.  A target for issue of 20 lakh Kisan
Credit Cards was fixed for public sector banks for the year 1999-2000.  They have
issued only 9.09 lakh cards during the period April and December, 1999.
Keeping in view the banks’ performance under both the schemes, they were
The progress made by all banks in extending loans under Swarnajayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) and Swarn
2
exhorted to achieve the respective targets by March, 2000.
the bankers for their consideration.
specific to banks, could be considered as and when needed.
in privately placed securities.Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) has not been upto the mark.  Banks were
Release : 1999-2000/1095
3
Press 
General Manger
Alpana Killawala
advised to make concerted efforts to improve their performance.