Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers, Monsoon 1999
January 3, 2000
The Monsoon 1999 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers has
been released today. "Occasional Papers" is a research journal of the Reserve Bank and
contains contributions which reflect the views of the authors. The issue provides a rich
fare of articles, special notes and review articles addressing themes which are at the
forefront of discussions worldwide. The Monsoon 1999 issue of the Occasional Papers
carries three articles, two special notes, two review articles and reviews of six books.
 severity and pervasiveness of recent currency storms and exchange market
seizures have lent urgency to the choice of the appropriate exchange rate regime. The
goals of exchange rate policy and the conduct of this policy by monetary authorities are
under closer public scrutiny than ever before. Since the onset of floating exchange rates
in the early seventies, foreign exchange markets have registered high turnovers as well as
high turbulence, completely dwarfing global foreign exchange reserves. Monetary
authorities, however, ‘manage’ exchange rates consistent with national priorities.
Consequently, they search for a guide to manage exchange rates and markets. In his paper
entitled “REER: The Leading Indicator”, author, Sitikantha Pattanaik holds that that an
exchange rate which reflects the ratios of purchasing power of currencies in their
respective countries stands the test of time. It is the real effective exchange rate (REER),
the statistical representation of purchasing power parities, which guides the conduct of
exchange rate policy and even performs the role of a leading indicator of currency crises.
Pattanaik advocates orderly correction for appreciation in the REER but cautions against
Volatility on the Indian Rupee
The Indian foreign exchange market has witnessed two major episodes of
speculative attacks, superimposed upon the movements of the exchange rate under the
market determined system. A common precedent associated with the onset of volatility in
the market is sharp movements in major cross currency exchange rates. Author, Rajiv
Ranjan and Sarat Chandra Dhal in their article entitled “Testing for the Impact of the
Cross Currency Volatility on the Indian Rupee” investigate the impact of cross currency
volatility in respect of major international exchange rates on the exchange rate of the
rupee. Their findings indicate that although the magnitude of the impact of cross currency
fluctuations on the rupee is small, it is likely to increase in the future as the foreign
exchange market develops in size and sophistication and integrates with global financial
markets. Their results also suggest that the Indian rupee is among the least volatile
currencies, attesting to the success of exchange rate management pursued over the
Even as the quest for the ‘ideal’ exchange rate regime goes on, and the answers to
the puzzle of why exchange rates behave as they do get firmed up, professional
economists all over the world are fortifying themselves against visitation of crisis
situations. Policy makers, national and supranational, are accelerating the development of
crisis prediction systems which can provide early warning triggers for corrective action to
mitigate the impact of crises, if not prevent them. The theories of economics and finance
provide scanty guidance in this regard. Author, Ashok K. Nag and Amit Mitra in their
article `Neural Networks and Early Warning Indicators of Currency Crisis' examine two
entirely data driven approaches to early warning systems for crises. They find that the
artificial intelligence approach which mimics the human brain in selecting early warning
indicators by the genetic principle of the survival of the fittest, outperforms competing
approaches.
Indicators of Currency Crisis
Neural Networks and Early Warning
nineties.
Testing for the Impact of Cross-Currency
the use of the REER to manage exchange rates for gaining external competitiveness.
 TheIn their article `The Dynamics of Money Supply Process in India : An Alternative
Empricial Framework', Himanshu Joshi and Indranil Bhattacharyya address another
segment of the financial markets spectrum – the credit market – in explaining the
behaviour of money in India. By focussing on the behaviour of the sources of demand for
credit in their article Joshi and Bhattacharyya predict that the credit market would have a
Over the last three or four years, the slowdown in industrial activity has been an
abiding source of concern. The modest recovery which has set in during 1999 has
improved business expectations about industrial sector performance as well as the
functioning of the economy in general. Information about the investment intentions of the
corporate sector provides vital clues regarding the strength of the recovery and its spread,
the factors influencing investment decisions and the capacity output gap. It also helps
prepare authorities for pressures on financial markets for investible funds. In a special
note entitled “Growth of Corporate Investment : An Attempt at Projection for 1999-
2000”, R. Satyanarayana and Sanjoy Bose provide a forecast of private corporate
investment in India for the year 1999-2000. According to the author, the expectation of
an increase of 9.5 per cent in private corporate investment along with softening of interest
rates and easy liquidity, makes for a 
In another special note, Ashutosh Raravikar celebrates the contributions of
Professor Robert Mundell on the event of the award of the Noble Prize for Economic
Science for the year 1999. Raravikar recounts Professor Mundell’s seminal work in the
areas of macro economics, monetary dynamics, optimum currency area, international
trade and supply side economics and refers to him as a colossus in the world of
Release : 1999-2000/862
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
economics whose contributions will continue to inspire future generations of economists.
favourable investment climate.
Special Notes
greater role in the formation of money supply in India in the coming years.
India : An Alternative Empirical Framework
The Dynamics of Money Supply Process in