the  Task Force to Study the Cooperative Credit System and Suggest
Measures for its Strengthening
August 2, 2000
Government of India constituted a Task Force in April, 1999 under the Chairmanship
of Shri Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India to study the
cooperative credit system and suggest measures for its strengthening. The other
members of the Task Force were Shri Shekhar Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of
Finance, Shri Govindan Nair, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Shri Y. C.
The terms of reference of the Task Force included a review of the functioning of the
cooperative credit structure for suggesting measures to make cooperatives member-
driven  business enterprises, rationalisation and improvement in costs,
spreads and effectiveness at various tiers of cooperative credit structure and with a
view to  improving their financial health so that they can become efficient and cost
effective instruments for delivery of rural credit and a review of the existing
supervisory and regulatory mechanism    for cooperative credit institutions and
suggest measures for 
The Task Force submitted its report to the Finance Minister on July 24, 2000 in
The report has emphasised the need for reducing Government control over
cooperatives, giving maximum autonomy to these institutions and recommended that
they should be regulated under the Banking Regulation Act. The report has
suggested development of staff and local leadership for cooperatives. Structural
changes recommended include an exit route for unviable units and merger of Long
Term and Short Term cooperative credit structures. In case a merger is not possible,
both type of institutions be allowed to handle long term as well as short term credit.
The report has concluded that strengthening of base level institutions would be the
key for strengthening the entire structure and recommended rehabilitation of
potentially viable units through a package of measures which encompasses financial,
operational, organisational and systemic aspects. The Task Force has recommended
that rehabilitation should be unit-specific and not across the board and  should be
taken up after studying its viability and possibility of turnaround in five to seven
years. The financial burden of rehabilitation will be shared by members contributing
20 percent of the costs by mobilising additional share  capital. Balance amount will
be provided by Central and State Governments by way of interest bearing bonds to
be redeemed in a phased manner. Share capital contribution from the State/Central
The report exhorts state governments to adopt Model Cooperative Societies Act or
dovetail the essential features of the Model Act in their respective State Cooperative
Societies Acts so as to ensure democratic functioning of cooperatives with least
interference from state government  and leaving banking functions clearly under the
governance of Banking Regulation Act. It has called for effective supervision of
lower tiers of the cooperative credit system by the higher tiers and introduction of
audit of cooperatives by chartered accountants.
1
Governments has not been recommended.
Delhi.
  strengthening the arrangements.
 professional
Nanda, Managing Director, NABARD.
Report of It has recommended that societies should be run professionally on business
principles and that interest rate spread available to them should be adequate to meet
costs, leaving some surplus. Cooperative banks should have freedom to take
investment decisions without the prior clearance from Registrar of Cooperative
Task Force has further recommended that Government should provide support to the
cooperative banks in their recovery effort and should desist from providing across
the board interest subsidy or making loan waiver announcements. A committee
approach to write off what is clearly not recoverable and compromise settlements is
suggested. It has suggested  that the provisions of the existing Debt Recovery
Tribunals may be made applicable to cooperative banks also where loan size is more
Rs. one 
It has suggested setting up a Cooperative Rehabilitation and Development Fund at
NABARD by contribution from Government of India and another Mutual Assistance
Fund at State level by contribution from cooperative institutions in the state
P V Sadanandan
:2000-2001/172
overdues.2
Press Release
Assistant Manager
concerned.
lakh so as to expedite recovery of chronic than 
Societies.