Bond Financing and Debt Stability:
June 23, 2000
The Development Research Group (DRG) in the Reserve Bank of India has brought  out  a study
entitled “ Bond  Financing and Debt Stability: Theoretical Issues and Empirical Analysis for
India”,  the nineteenth  in the DRG Study Series. The Study is authored by Prof. Vivek ,
Bhupal Singh and Dr. Sarat 
The DRG Studies series have an accent on policy-oriented research. They are released for
wide circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among professional economists
and policy makers on subjects of current interest (the study is available on RBI 
. The views expressed in these studies are those of the authors and do not
The study examines the theoretical considerations and empirical results of the switch to
market borrowing,  bond financing of the fiscal deficit, with correspondingly low monetisation,
as part of India’s structural reforms initiated in 1991. It basically concludes that despite the sharp
deterioration in State finances and  persistently large market borrowing programme of the Centre,
the move to market borrowings to finance the deficit is proving to be beneficial when viewed in
relation to broader movements in the major fiscal variables over time. The study makes a clear
distinction between the consequences of borrowing at market interest rates versus those of non-
In preference to recent econometric approaches to test the Government’s long run debt
profile, the study proposes a simple necessary condition, popularly known as the Domar condition,
to evaluate the prospects for debt stability under which GDP growth should exceed the interest rate
on Government debt. Based on the premises that in the long run, it is not possible to trade growth for
inflation (although such a trade off may be possible in the short run) and that the central bank is
unable to influence real variables (real output and real interest rates) in the long run, the study
simulates different short and long run consequences of alternative combinations of bond and money
financing of budget deficits on interest rates, growth, inflation, the debt-to-GDP ratio and measures
Empirical evaluation of the Domar debt-stability condition reveals that Central Government
debt, under certain assumptions, may remain stable at prevailing levels of the primary deficit and
monetised deficit.  High administered rates in the Small Savings and Provident Fund Schemes, i.e.,
due to non-market based borrowing,   sustainability in future. The
study argues that bond financing of the fiscal deficit has contributed to fiscal consolidation by
inducing the Government to reduce primary . This conclusion holds even for the
combined finances of the Central and State Governments. Robust evidence indicates that non-
government borrowing costs have come down relative to those of the Government, and credit
conditions for non-government borrowers are now easier , after the move to bond finance. Further,
some evidence suggests that private capital formation has surged in recent years, contradicting the
view that the anti-inflation policy of bond finance has crowded out private investment and adversely
affected growth. However, the stability in market debt notwithstanding, the overall fiscal situation is
critical because of potential instability in non-market debt and due to unfunded and contingent
P. V. Sadanandan
Release : 1999-2000/1705
Press 
. Manager Asstt
liabilities of the Central and State Governments.
expenditures
pose problems for debt however,
of the interest burden.
market liabilities.
i.e.
reflect the views of the Reserve Bank.
http://www.rbi.org.in)
website
Dhal. Chandra Shri 
Moorthy
Theoretical Issues and Empirical Analysis for India