and investment in shares, etc.
In pursuance of the announcement made in the Monetary and Credit Policy for the
year 2000 – 2001, Reserve Bank of India had set up a Standing Technical Committee on
Bank Financing of Equities, comprising officials of RBI and SEBI ,  to develop operative
guidelines for a transparent and stable system of bank financing of equities and
investment in shares. The Report of the Committee submitted on August 2, 2000 was
placed on the RBI Website soliciting comments on the proposals made by the Committee
from banks, financial institutions and other market participants. A meeting with Chief
of  major banks was also taken by the Deputy Governor, Shri S. P. Talwar, on
September 19, 2000 to elicit the views of the banks on the recommendations made by the
Committee. Keeping in view the views expressed by the bankers in the meeting  as also
by other market participants, the Reserve Bank has finalised the draft guidelines on bank
The draft guidelines have proposed that the terms and conditions for financing of
initial public offerings ( IPOs) should be the same as advances against shares to
individuals. The maximum amount of finance that can be extended to an individual
against IPOs should not exceed Rs.10 lakh. Corporates should not be extended credit by
banks for investment in other companies’ IPOs. Similarly, banks should not provide
finance to NBFCs for further lending to individuals for IPOs. As regards issue of
guarantees on behalf of brokers, it is proposed that a minimum margin of 25 per cent
inclusive of cash margin should be obtained.  The advances against collateral security of
shares and advances to individuals for personal purposes like education, housing,
, etc. would be excluded for reckoning a bank’s exposure to capital market.
As recommended by the RBI-SEBI Committee, it is proposed that the ceiling
prescribed  for banks  investment  in  shares,  etc.  should  be  related to outstanding
advances and not to incremental deposits of the previous year. Within the overall
exposure to sensitive sectors, the exposure to capital market by way of investments in
shares, convertible debentures and unit of mutual funds should not exceed 5% of the
bank’s total outstanding credit as on 31st March of the previous year. The draft guidelines
have clarified that the ceilings for investments in shares is not mandatory . The Board of
Directors of banks shall formulate their policy on exposure to capital market. Similarly,
the extent upto which banks may invest in shares directly or through UTI and SEBI
approved other diversified mutual funds with a good track record will be as per the
The Standing Technical Committee of RBI and SEBI will review these guidelines
after six months on the basis of the feed back received from banks and other market
participants.
The draft guidelines have been placed on the RBI web-site, , for
September 30,
 whereafter the Reserve Bank of India will finalise the guidelines.  The comments
on the proposals may be forwarded to : Shri A Ghosh, Chief General Manager-in-
Charge, Department of Banking Operations and Developemnt, Reserve Bank of India,
Central Office, World Trade Centre, 
Release : 2000-2001/443
2000September 21, 2000
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400005.
comments of banks, financial institutions and other market participants by 
www.rbi.org.in
investment policy approved by the Board of Directors of each bank.
consumption
financing of equities and investment in shares.
Executives 
Draft Guidelines on bank financing of equities