FEMA heralds Conducive Environment
for Foreign Investments
July 5, 2000
The new Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) 1999 has heralded a new
conducive environment for foreign investment in India, said Shri P.R. Gopala Rao, Executive
Director, Reserve Bank of India.  He was addressing a discussion session arranged by the Forum
Introduced from June 1, 2000, the FEMA is a landmark legislation, he stated and added
that it brings a paradigm shift in the manner in which foreign exchange is to be treated in India.
From the earlier regime of conservation of foreign exchange resources, the objective of the new
FEMA is to facilitate external trade and payments and promote orderly maintenance of foreign
exchange market in India. In other words, the objective of FEMA is to provide foreign exchange
to all those who genuinely need it and thus create an environment to facilitate globalisation of
The Executive Director further explained that FEMA makes a clear distinction between
capital account transactions and current account transactions and also clearly demarcates
authority between the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India.  The new law also
minimises the scope for interpretation by clearly prohibiting transactions that cannot be
undertaken under the capital account.  All current account transactions which are not specifically
prohibited can now be freely undertaken.  The Reserve Bank has also delegated most of its
powers under current account transactions to authorised dealers including freedom of
Shri Gopala Rao pointed out that the most significant aspect of FEMA is that unlike
FERA which was a criminal act, FEMA is a civil act. This, he explained would place the burden
Under the new regime, many channels of raising resources through ADRs, GDRs, 
etc ., are placed under the automatic route.  The Executive Director pointed out that the Reserve
Bank has taken up an education drive to familiarise the banks, corporates and general public on
details of FEMA. It was also announced that the Reserve Bank would clarify aspects relating to
FEMA through telephone, fax, e-mail to the general public.  Queries may be addressed to the
Reserve Bank of India, FEMA Cell, Exchange Control Department, Central Office Building, 10
Floor, Bhagat Singh Road, Fort, Mumbai - 400001. Tel.: 2654996, Fax : 266 5330 and E-
rbecdpcd@bol.net.in)
Press Release No. 2000-2001/24
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
mail address 
Shahid 
th
ECBs,
of proof with the accuser.
prescription of documents for foreign exchange remittances.
Indian industry.
The session was attended by company executives. of Free Enterprises in Mumbai today. 