§  
to be linked with Banks' total Outstanding Advances
§  
§  
The banks’ exposure to capital market by way of investments in shares, convertible
debentures and units of mutual funds may now be linked with their total outstanding
advances and may be limited to 5 per cent of such advances. This has been recommended by
the Committee comprising senior executives of the Reserve Bank of India and the Securities
and Exchange Board of India. The Committee was set up in pursuance of the Monetary and
Credit Policy for the year 2000-2001 with the objective of evolving operative guidelines for a
transparent and stable system of banks' investment and financing of equities. The Committee
has, while finalising its report, had the benefit of discussions with the Chief Executives of
select banks which have exposure to capital market. The Committee has also obtained
feedback from other participants, including brokers. It submitted its report to the Reserve
Bank on August 30, 2000.
Explaining the rationale behind its recommendation of linking banks’ advances to shares,
debentures etc., with total outstanding advances, the Committee has stated that the present
norm of banks investing up to 5 per cent of their incremental deposits of the previous year in
shares, debentures, etc., did not reflect the shift in the asset portfolio of banks from credit to
investment. It has, therefore, recommended that the ceiling prescribed for banks’ investments
in shares, debentures, and units of mutual funds should be related to outstanding advances
While suggesting the operative guidelines for banks’ investments in the capital market, the
Committee’s approach has been to optimise the opportunities for banks to take advantage of
the returns available from the capital market without exposing them to undue risks that arise
due to volatility in the capital market. In view of the Committee, such a system of banks'
investment and financing of equities would also contribute to a healthy development of
The Committee has also suggested that banks which do not have in-house expertise in
research in capital market may invest not less than 2/3 of their eligible amount in units of UTI
and SEBI approved mutual funds. In an attempt to streamline the guidelines for banks’
investment in the capital market, the Committee has, for the first time, also recommended
IPOs).
 : Since the capital market is exposed to constant price fluctuation, the banks'
policy with regard to financing against shares should be one of risk minimisation. The
September 2, 2000
Policy  (i)
The following are the main recommendations of the Committee.
guidelines for banks’ financing of Initial Public Offerings (
financial markets.
and not to incremental deposits of the previous year.
Guidelines for IPO Financing by Banks
of Eligible Amount in Units of Mutual Funds
Banks with no Expertise to invest Two-thirds
Ceiling for Banks' Investment in Capital Market
RBI-SEBI Committee submits Report
Streamlining Banks' Investments in Capital Market:Committee has, therefore, recommended that the banks’ policy in financing against
shares should be such that they are not exposed to undue risks emanating out of
volatility in capital market.  The Committee has also made recommendations on margin
prudential limits on exposure, etc., to 
 Ceiling for banks' investment in capital market : The Committee has recommended
that the ceiling prescribed for banks’ investments in shares, convertible debentures and
units of mutual funds (other than debt funds) should be related to outstanding advances
and not to incremental deposits of the previous year.  The Committee has, therefore,
recommended that within the overall exposure to sensitive sectors, a bank’s exposure to
capital market by way of investments in shares, convertible debentures and units of
mutual funds (other than debt funds), may be limited to 5 per cent of their total
outstanding advances. The recommendation follows the Committee's view that the
existing norm of 5 per cent of the incremental deposits of the previous year for
investments in shares, etc ., did not reflect the shift in the asset portfolio of banks from
credit to investment.
 Flexibility to invest in units of mutual funds: The Committee has recommended that
banks which do not have in-house expertise in capital market, may invest, not less than
two-third of the eligible amount, in units of UTI or SEBI approved mutual funds. The
balance one-third of the eligible amount may be deployed directly by the banks in listed
 Financing : According to the Committee, the terms and conditions for financing of
initial public offerings ( IPOs) should be the same as those applicable to advances
against shares to individuals. The ceiling on the amount of advances as also margin as
applicable to advances against shares to individuals, should apply mutatis mutandis to
financing of IPOs. The maximum amount of finance extended to an individual against
IPOs should, however, be Rs.10 lakh, as applicable to advances against physical shares.
Corporates should not be given advances for IPOs.  Banks should also not extend
finance to NBFCs in any form for on-lending to individuals for IPOs. Finance extended
by a bank for IPOs should be reckoned as an exposure to the capital market.
 Margins : Considering the fact that the minimum margin taken by banks depends upon
the scrip and that margins higher than the minimum stipulated by the Reserve Bank are
usually obtained keeping in view the price movements for the past six months, the
Committee felt that the margins stipulated on advances against shares to individuals
 Bank  : The Committee has recommended that the minimum margin of 25
per cent, inclusive of cash margin, should be stipulated for issue of guarantees on behalf
of brokers.  The maximum amount of margin to be obtained is, however, left to the
boards of banks. The recommendation is made considering it is prudent for the banks to
maintain adequate margin which will ensure that the brokers do not build up
 The Committee has recommended that the following may be excluded for reckoning the
banks’ aggregate exposure to capital market:
a) 
 Advances granted to individuals for personal purposes like education, housing,
c) Credit substitutes like commercial paper, etc., may not be considered as part of
credit portfolio.
consumption, etc., against the security of shares,
b)
Advances against collateral security of shares,
  (vii)
substantially leveraged position and at the same time, the banks minimize their risks.
Guarantee  (vi)
needed no review.
  (v)
IPOs  (iv)
equity shares.
  (iii)
  (ii)
minimise the risks due to price fluctuations. The Committee has recommended that the board of each bank should lay down a
prudential ceiling on the bank’s total exposure to capital market, keeping in view its
The recommendations made by the Committee are now being examined by the
Reserve Bank of India.  The Reserve Bank would welcome comments on the
recommendations from banks, financial institutions and other market participants. For this
purpose, it has placed the Report of the Committee on the RBI Website (
Comments may be sent by September 15, 2000 to: Shri Amalendu Ghosh, Chief General
Manager-in-Charge, Department of Banking Operations and Development, Reserve bank of
India, Centre I, World Trade Centre, 
Release : 2000-2001/339
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
Fax : 2183785. Cuffe Parade, Mumbai-400 005. 
www.rbi.org.in)
overall risk profile.
  (viii)