• No changes in monetary policy measures such as Bank Rate and CRR.
• As per current indications, RBI expects interest rate environment to remain
stable.  RBI to ensure adequate availability of liquidity and credit to support
• Money supply growth, reserve money and government borrowing  are on
trajectory.  RBI urges a strong framework to build up positive expectations on
the fiscal front.
• 
• 
• New norms for valuation of banks’ investments.
• EEFC facility to continue.
• Much greater flexibility to corporates to raise resources through commercial
• Measures to improve credit delivery mechanisms, technology upgradation,
further deregulation and 
In a meeting with Chief Executives of major commercial banks, Dr.Bimal Jalan, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India presented a Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for 2000-
2001.  After a review of domestic and external developments, Governor mentioned that RBI
will  continue to endeavour to maintain a stable interest rate environment.  As per present
indications, the liquidity conditions are likely to remain adequate to meet the demand for
commercial credit from industrial and other sectors.  Governor added that the Reserve Bank
2. On the domestic front, overall, the outlook for agricultural supplies was comfortable
while the industrial production showed a lower growth compared to last year. Governor
mentioned that taking into account the estimates of Central Statistical  for the
first quarter of 2000-01 at 5.8 per cent, the real GDP growth during 2000-01 could be placed
in the range of 6.0 – 6.5 per cent as against the projection of 6.5 – 7.0 per cent indicated in
the April policy statement.
3. On the inflation front, he said that while a close watch had to be kept, the overall
demand/supply conditions in respect of sensitive commodities and manufactured goods
remained comfortable. The annual inflation rate, excluding the effect of ‘fuel, power, light
and lubricants group’ worked out to only 2.44 per cent.  The inflation for the year as a whole
Domestic Developments
was likely to be close to the average of last two years.
Organisation
would also provide appropriate liquidity as necessary through its LAF.
rationalisation of procedures.
paper.  Transferability of CDs made easier.
New guidelines for banks’ participation in capital market.
LAF will continue to be operated in a flexible manner.
growth.
Highlights
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2000-2001
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of2
4. Governor indicated that the growth of money supply and aggregate deposits of
scheduled commercial banks in the current financial year were on the expected trajectory and
the projected growth in M was likely to remain around 15 per cent; and the increase in
3
aggregate deposits would be of the order of Rs.1 ,25,000 crore as envisaged in the April
statement.  There had been a shift in the sources contributing to the reserve money expansion
which was mainly due to increase in net RBI credit to central government this year compared
to the growth in net foreign exchange assets and credit to commercial sector in the last year.
5. The statement mentioned that there had been a significant pick up in bank credit and
6. While reviewing the borrowing programme of the central government, Governor
mentioned that the normal pace was maintained and RBI continued to combine auction issues
with acceptance by private placement of dated securities of the Government, consistent with
7. The centre’s fiscal deficit upto August 2000 showing an improvement compared to
last year, contributed by a large increase in revenue receipts and a marginal increase in
expenditure, was encouraging. Governor mentioned that the budgetary outlook remained
uncertain on account of pace of progress in receipts from disinvestments and the budgetary
outgo to meet the shortfall in the oil pool account.  He emphasised that it was absolutely
essential to contain the borrowing programme within the budgeted levels and added that a
reduction in the borrowing programme would be desirable to keep the interest rate outlook
8. While enumerating the several initiatives taken in recent years with  regard to internal
debt management policy,  the statement observed that it was necessary for a strong
framework to be put in place to build up positive expectations on the fiscal front. Governor
9. Reviewing the developments in the external sector, it was mentioned that there had
been marked changes in the external environment since April.  The year 1999-2000 was a
good year inasmuch as the foreign currency assets of India increased by US $ 5.54 billion and
forex markets were generally stable.  However, the period from about mid-May to early
August 2000 proved to be difficult for the management of the external sector. The forex
markets were affected by considerable uncertainty.  Since the middle of August 2000,
Governor said, the situation had shown some improvement, and forex markets and reserve
10. Dwelling on the various factors such as ‘expectations’, ‘bandwagon effect’ and
volatility in capital flows which he said played a major role in exchange rate movements, the
statement observed that it was not possible to come to a definitive conclusion about the
relative role of different factors in explaining the behaviour of forex markets in India during
May – August 2000.
11. Recalling the measures taken in May, July and August this year, Governor mentioned
that it might be argued that a recourse to one or two measures more intensively would have
been more appropriate, or alternatively the rupee exchange rate could have been allowed to
levels had been relatively stable.
External Developments
hoped that the proposed Fiscal Responsibility Legislation would address this issue.
positive and stable.
market conditions.
other flows to the commercial sector from the banking system.
Reserve money expansion was expected to remain moderate and significantly lower.3
depreciate much more sharply to “find its own level”. But, he observed that, while at times
the underlying causes of exchange market volatility were easy to diagnose, often the precise
cause and the degree of volatility as well as its duration were difficult to estimate or forecast.
Therefore, he said that in the situation prevailing in our exchange markets during May-
August 2000, and based on a continuous analysis of the evolving situations, recourse to a
combination of measures was preferred so that the adverse impact on the rest of the economy
could be minimised. He further observed that a reliance on one or two measures (e.g., sharp
monetary tightening or unchecked depreciation of the exchange rate, and/or unlimited use of
reserves) could have had unacceptable longer term consequences for the economy and the
12. Referring to the recent debate that it would be appropriate if, during periods of excess
capital flows or capital surge (as experienced during some months in 1999-2000, and also
earlier), the rupee were allowed to appreciate substantially (rather than the RBI absorbing
part or whole of the excess supply), the statement recognised the theoretical merit of the
argument. In reality, however, the situation was somewhat more complicated as it was not
clear whether greater volatility in exchange rates, and continuing sharp depreciation within a
very short period during periods of excess demand, would stabilise expectations or destabilise
currency markets beyond the levels of tolerance.  Recalling his April statement, Governor
observed that the recent international experience particularly during the period of the East
Asian crisis, had highlighted the fact that emerging market economies have to largely rely on
their own resources during external exigencies as there was no “lender of the last resort” to
provide additional liquidity at short notice. As such, it was  felt that while two-way
movements in currency were certainly desirable and no attempt should be made to provide a
“floor” when there were excess capital inflows, it was necessary to keep the above
13. lesson of experience, not only in India but also in other countries, was that given
the nature of foreign exchange markets and uncertainty in the direction of capital flows in a
floating rate environment, the situation and outlook could change dramatically within short
periods and extreme caution and care needed to be exercised in the management of the
14. While calling for vigilance and caution against uncertainties arising on account of
high international crude oil prices, Governor listed the favourable factors for India that
included continued good performance of exports, particularly software exports; 
comfortable level of foreign exchange reserves; a favourable outlook for foreign direct
investment in certain important sectors (such as, Information Technology and
Telecommunications); a relatively low level of external commercial debt, particularly short-
term debt; and a positive outlook for sustained economic growth. He emphasised that no
effort should be spared to take maximum advantage of these positive factors, and to further
accelerate the process of growth with particular emphasis on exports.
15. The statement observed that despite the substantial increase in the oil import bill,
increase in exports and invisible receipts was expected to keep the current account deficit for
the year 2000-01 at less than 2.0 per cent of GDP.
16. Governor explained the several measures that had been introduced to ensure timely
delivery of credit to exporters and remove procedural hassles.  The various suggestions
received from export organisations and exporters were examined by the Bankers’ Group and
banks are being advised to implement the recommendations of the Group.
a
exchange rate and foreign exchange reserves.
A
considerations in view in order to guard against unexpected contingencies.
financial system, including a much greater risk of non-reversible destabilisation.4
17. In April, Reserve Bank had invited reacti ons of NRIs on the actual working of the
simplified procedures introduced in the last two years  and suggestions for further
improvement. Governor indicated that most of the responses had been highly positive, and no
special problems in the operation of these schemes were reported.
18. Referring to several initiatives taken by the Government to encourage the flow of
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) on mutually beneficial basis, Governor mentioned that “in
principle” or prior approval of the Reserve Bank was no longer required for any FDI and
Second Half of 2000-2001
19. Discussing the stance of monetary policy for the second half of 2000-2001, it was
noted that the change in the course of monetary measures had elicited a fair amount of
comments and debate.  Governor mentioned that the possibility of  “a change in course” and
“tightening of monetary policy” in the event of a change in the domestic or international
situation was specifically recognised in the April policy statement.  He also added, based on
the recent historical experience, that central banks changing course in response to the
emerging situations was often unavoidable. He emphasised that it was essential for market
participants to take greater recourse to appropriate asset-liability and risk management
techniques in order to take account of unanticipated changes in monetary conditions and the
interest rate outlook.
20. He observed that the external outlook principally in respect of crude oil prices as also
the domestic inflationary outlook were somewhat uncertain.  Taking these factors as well as
Government’s borrowing requirements into account, liquidity conditions were likely to
remain adequate during the rest of the year. The banking system was not expected to face any
difficulty in meeting fully the demand for commercial credit  from industrial and other
sectors.  Reserve Bank also stood ready to provide appropriate liquidity through its Liquidity
21. While it would continue to be the endeavour of the RBI to maintain a stable interest
rate environment, Governor emphasised that it would be prudent for banks and financial
institutions to make sufficient allowances for unforeseen contingencies, including possible
22. While stating that LAF introduced since June 5, 2000 was being  effectively used to
influence short-term interest rates by modulating day-to-day liquidity conditions and to
contain volatility in foreign exchange market, Governor said that the LAF would continue to
be operated in a flexible manner, both in terms of the applicable rates and tenors, in keeping
with the developments in financial markets.
23. Governor briefly reviewed the progress made so far in respect of  structural measures
initiated by the Bank in the recent past to improve the functioning of the various segments of
financial markets and announced modifications to some of them.    He pointed out that as far
as possible, changes proposed, had been decided after extensive consultations with experts
Monetary Policy Measures
Financial Sector Reforms and
changes in monetary measures in their business operation plans.
Adjustment Facility (LAF) as necessary.
Stance of Monetary Policy for the
ECB proposals satisfying Government guidelines.5
and market participants and suggestions made by commentators in media as well as
The following measures were announced in the Statement :
24.  
• Considering the fact that the repo market was yet to be broad-based in terms of
instruments and participants, it has been decided to extend the specific permission
granted to select corporates to route call money transactions through Primary Dealers
(PDs), which is available now upto December, 2000 for a further period of six
months, i.e., upto June 2001. As regards other Financial Institutions and Mutual
Funds which are currently permitted to lend directly in the call/notice money market,
a Group will be constituted to suggest a smooth phasing out by a planned reduction in
their access to call/notice money market.
• Taking into account the suggestions received from participants, on a draft of the
revised guidelines circulated in July 2000, the guidelines on issue of Commercial
Paper (CP) were issued. The new guidelines are expected to provide considerable
flexibility to participants and add depth and vibrancy to the CP market while at the
same time ensuring prudential safeguards and transparency.  In particular, the
guidelines will enable companies in the services sector to more easily meet their
• With a view to providing flexibility and depth to the secondary market, the restriction
on transferability period for CDs issued by both banks and financial institutions is
• In order to improve the functional efficiency of the market, the rating is made
mandatory for the term deposits accepted by all-India financial institutions with effect
from November 1, 2000.
25.  
After reviewing the varied measures taken, the following  further measures for  development
of government securities market  are  introduced:
• With a view to encouraging investors to hold securities in scrip-less form and to
ensure that entities holding securities in custody employ practices and procedures so
that the constituents’ securities are appropriately accounted and kept safe, a set of
• Reserve Bank of India would specify the date for switchover to order-driven screen-
based system for trading in government securities on the stock exchange, in
consultation with SEBI.  It will be applicable to all Stock Exchanges on which banks
and FIs can operate.
guidelines governing the maintenance of the Constituents’ SGL Accounts is issued.
Government Securities Market
withdrawn.
short-term working capital needs.
Development of Money Market
specialised journals.6
26.  
• Banks were advised in October 1998 to make a general provision on standard assets
of a minimum of 25 basis points from the year ended March 31, 2000. It is proposed
• The Report of the Informal Group on Valuation of Banks’ Investment Portfolio was
circulated among banks and the guidelines have now been finalised keeping in view
the comments and suggestions received from them.  The revised guidelines are in
consonance with the best international practices on categorisation and valuation of
investments and are effective from the half-year ended September 30, 2000.
• In order to bring more transparency to the balance sheets of public sector banks and
as a further step towards consolidated supervision and to provide additional
disclosures, public sector banks should also annex the balance sheets of their
subsidiaries to their balance sheet beginning from the year ending March 31, 2001.
• Due to the improvements in the payment and settlement systems, recovery climate,
upgradation of technology in the banking sector, etc., the concept of "past due" is
being dispensed with, effective March 31, 2001.
• After a review of current practices regarding credit exposure limits vis-à-vis
international best practices, it has been decided to prepare a detailed Discussion Paper
on the subject which is expected to be finalised by December 2000.   Based on the
comments and suggestions on the issues, and followed by an interaction  with banks,
RBI will take a final view on the approach that should be adopted with a view to
27.  
       
• Based on the feedback received from banks and other market participants on the RBI
– SEBI Technical Committee report, the guidelines on bank financing of equities and
investment in shares have been finalized and are issued.  The RBI-SEBI Technical
Committee will review the actual working of these new guidelines after six months, in
consultation with select banks.  If any changes in operational procedures and/or
overall framework are required, the Committee’s recommendations will be widely
28.  
       
On a review, in order to facilitate quick export-related payments and reduce
transaction costs, it has been decided to restore fully the earlier entitlements of 70 per cent
and 50 per cent respectively.  Payments, which can be made from these accounts will also
remain the same as before.  However, the EEFC accounts  will henceforth be held in the form
of current accounts.  The cheque-issuing facility against these accounts will continue to be
available for convenience of exporters.  No credit facilities, either fund based or non-fund
based, will be provided by banks against the EEFC balances.
Currency A/cs (EEFC) Facility
Review of Exchange Earners Foreign
circulated and discussed with all concerned.
Investment in Shares
Bank Financing of Equities and
making it effective from March end 2002.
to include the general provision on standard assets in Tier 2 capital.
Prudential Measures7
29.  
• Since the Boards have been empowered to decide the Prime Lending Rate as also the
spread over PLR, to give further operational autonomy to the banks, banks will be
free to decide penal interest.  Banks may formulate transparent policy for charging
penal interest rates, with the approval of their Boards.
• On a review of market conditions and with a view to providing the flexibility to banks
in prescribing margins, it has been decided to withdraw the existing prescriptions
• In the context of the present policy of providing more  flexibility and operational
freedom to banks as well as government and other enterprises, it has been decided to
undertake a review of consortium arrangements for food credit.  A Committee
• A Working Group on Bills Discounting by Banks was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri K.R.  Ramamoorthy, to examine inter alia the possibility of
extending bills discounting facility especially to services sector. Based on the
feedback and in consultation with market participants, RBI will evolve suitable
• Banks are advised to closely monitor the progress and make earnest efforts to
implement programmes under Kisan credit cards, Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar
Yojana (SGSY), Self Help Group (SHGs) and Small Scale Industries (SSI).
30.  
Reserve Bank is working out the modalities in  consultation with the associations of NBFCs,
for formation of a Self Regulatory Organisation of NBFCs. Draft guidelines for asset liability
management and formats of separate balance sheet for NBFCs have been circulated among
the members of Informal Advisory Group on NBFCs for the views of industry. Further steps
would be taken to put in place the disclosure norms and guidelines for risk management for
31.  
• “Payment System Vision Document”, under preparation, will detail the payment
• The Bank has established an internal Group on Internet Banking to identify the risks
to the organization and the banking system; suggest an appropriate supervisory and
legal framework; suggest measures for adoption of the international best practices;
recommend adequate security systems in conformity with international standards; and
suggest a clearing and settlement arrangement for electronic banking and electronic
• In the four metros, the Reserve Bank is all set to introduce Greyscale Imaging
Technology as a value added service being provided to the members of the Clearing
House.
money transfers.
system agenda proposed to be followed for the next 2/3 years.
Technology Upgradation
NBFCs.
Non-Banking Financial Companies
guidelines for implementation.
representing banks, RBI, Government and FCI will be constituted for the purpose.
under selective credit control on free sale sugar.
Credit Delivery Mechanisms8
32.  
• In his budget speech in February 2000, the Union Finance Minister has  underscored
the need for according greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.  The
Reserve Bank of India is working on proposals for amendments to Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 and Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in this regard.
33.  
• It may be recalled that a Standing Committee on International Financial Standards
and Codes  was set up to identify and monitor the developments in global standards
and codes. Advisory groups in ten major subject areas were set up in the beginning of
this year to assist the Standing Committee.  Of these ten, one group has submitted its
final report while three others have submitted first part of their respective reports.
The reports are available on the Bank’s website ( ). All the Advisory
Groups are expected to finalise their Reports by end  November 2000.
34. The Reserve Bank would like to take this opportunity to express its appreciation to
bankers, experts, market participants and members of the public who have sent their
suggestions to the Regulations Review Authority (RRA) set up by the Bank in April 1999.
The RRA will formally cease to operate on March 31, 2001.
:2000-2001/546
Press Release
Regulation Review Authority
www.rbi.org.in
International Financial Standards and Codes
Legal Reforms