April 27, 2000
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which sets global standards for regulation and
supervision, had released in June 1999 a Consultative Paper on ‘ A New Capital Adequacy
’ for comments by central bankers, market players and other interested parties.
The new Framework is designed to rectify shortcomings of the 1988 Accord and also in
addressing the in-built deficiencies in the current risk weighting model.  The new Framework
calls for better alignment of regulatory capital with underlying risks, by replacing the current
broadbrush approach with preferential risk weighting.  The new Framework also extended its
scope to provide for explicit capital charge for other risks viz. operational risk and interest
rate risk in the banking book for the banks where interest rate risks are significantly above
).
The new Framework is built on a three-pillar approach - minimum capital requirement
supervisory review  market discipline to strengthen the international financial
architecture.
The adoption of the new Framework in the present form will have important implications for
emerging markets and will call for structural changes in the current regulatory and
supervisory standards. Recognising the implications of the new Framework on emerging
market economies, an internal Working Group was constituted in the RBI to examine the
impact and applicability, scope for and problems in implementation and the time span within
which the Framework could be adapted to Indian conditions. Based on the recommendations
of the Group, the RBI has finalised and forwarded its comments on the new Framework to
..
While appreciating the Basel Committee’s initiative in addressing the rigidities of 1988
Accord and the three-pillar approach, RBI is of the view that some of the recommendations
require modifications / flexibilities to fully reflect the macro economic environment,
structural rigidities and concerns of emerging markets.  Regarding the scope of application,
RBI feels that where banks are of simple structure and have subsidiaries, the Accord could be
adopted on stand-alone basis with the full deduction of equity contribution made to
subsidiaries from the total capital. There is also a need for discretion to national supervisors
upto which cross-holdings could be permitted.
RBI considered in depth the issue of relying on external credit rating agencies as the basis for
assigning preferential risk weights on country exposure, bank exposure and exposure to other
sectors.  Considering the track record and differences in the attribution of ratings, lack of
uniformity in selection of parameters, RBI is of the view that assigning   to
external rating agencies in the regulatory process would not be desirable.  Instead, RBI
prefers that the assessment made by domestic rating agencies that have upto -date and
ongoing access to information on domestic macro economic conditions, legal and regulatory
framework etc. could be a better alternative source for assigning preferential risk weights for
banking book assets (excluding claims on sovereign), subject to adequate safeguard.  This
alternative would provide national supervisors greater access to quality of assessment sources
and methodologies used by various rating agencies.  RBI also favours that greater reliance
1
role greater
to prescribe a material limit 
The  views of the RBI, in brief,  are:
www.rbi.org.in website the Basle Committee, and can soon be accessed at RBI’s 
and
,
outliers average (
Framework
The 
New Capital Adequacy Frameworkneeds to be placed on internal rating-based approaches of banks which can be structured
under an acceptable framework.  Such an approach would encourage banks to refine their risk
RBI welcomes the Basel Committee’s approach to dispense with the grouping of countries
into OECD / non-OECD for assigning risk weights.  RBI also endorses the Committee’s
proposal to provide discretion to national supervisors to give modified treatment for banks’
exposure to their own sovereign, denominated in domestic currencies and funded in same
While appreciating the Basel Committee’s proposal to distinguish financial institutions on the
basis of their credit quality, RBI is of the view that risk weighting of banks should be de-
linked from that of the sovereign in which they are incorporated. Instead, preferential risk
weights in the range of 20-50%, on a graded scale, could be assigned on the basis of risk
assessments by domestic rating agencies.  As regards the proposal to assign  risk
weight to short-term claims, RBI is of the view that this proposal will seriously jeopardise the
stability of international financial architecture, since from the macro economic point of view,
short-term claims could not be a perfect option as this will lead to regulatory arbitrage
through roll-overs, concentration of short-term liabilities and serious asset - liability
mismatches, which could trigger systemic crises.  The proposal to link the banking supervisor
implementing / endorsing the Core Principles for Effective Supervision for lower risk
As regards the Basel Committee’s proposal to assign risk weights to claims on corporates on
the basis of ratings, it is observed that the population of rated entities is very few in many
countries, especially in emerging markets.  RBI is of the view that preferential risk weights
could be assigned to corporates, above a material limit, on the basis of risk assessments by
domestic rating agencies.  Further, risk weight should solely be dependent upon the credit
ratings and the proposal to link it with the risk weight of the sovereign of the 
country of incorporation needs reconsideration.  While agreeing with the Committee’s
proposal that credit risk modelling could have the potential to be used in the supervisory
process, the adoption of such models as an alternative for setting capital charge in emerging
markets is severely constrained by data limitations and model validation.  The modifications
and the parameters for identifying  for mandating explicit capital charge for interest
rate in the banking book needs further discussion.  RBI fully endorses the Committee’s
proposal that each financial institution should critically assess its capital adequacy
requirements and that supervisors should have methods for such assessments by financial
institutions.  While agreeing with the Committee’s views on increased disclosures and
enhanced transparency, national supervisors should consider the ability of the market to
In view of the less developed institutional and accounting infrastructure, many emerging
market economies may not be able to implement all the proposed measures, as and when
they take final shape and the new Framework finally replaces the 1988 Accord.
Specifically, emerging markets would need certain transition period to implement the
proposals in respect of consolidation of accounts and assigning capital on a consolidated
basis, setting benchmarks and approving the rating methodologies of domestic rating
agencies, improving the technical capabilities of supervisors and financial institutions,
mapping of individual ratings of banks with the regulatory risk weight baskets, assigning
of explicit capital charge for interest rate risk in the banking book and other risks e.g.
2
logically interpret the information.
outliers
corporate’s
weights, is also not desirable.
favourable
currencies.
assessments and monitoring process.operational risk, estimating economic capital and introducing more disclosures on risk-
based capital ratios, etc.  Basel Committee may consider these constraints and explicitly
Release : 1999/2000/1441
3
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
provide for sufficient transition time for emerging markets in the final Framework.