to avoid 
The Reserve Bank of India(RBI) will, from October 3, 2000 introduce a special fund
facility for securities settlement. Meant for banks and primary dealers, the objective of the
scheme is to provide intra-day funds to facilitate settlement of securities transactions in case
The delivery versus payment system introduced by the Reserve Bank in July 1995 has
generally been working satisfactorily. There have, however, been a few instances of gridlock
in the system. This mainly occurred on account of shortage of funds on a gross basis in the
current account of one or more SGL account holders.  To take care of such unusual and
exceptional occurrences, the scheme of special fund facility for security settlement has been
envisaged. Introduction of the scheme was announced in the Monetary and Credit Policy for
The delivery versus payment system involves simultaneous transfer of securities and
funds in government securities transactions to alleviate counter party risk. Under this system
trades are settled on gross basis with irrevocable final settlement taking place simultaneously
for securities and funds. This necessitates adequate funds in the buyer’s account and
sufficient balance of securities in the seller’s account. With the increase in government
securities transactions, it is likely that the transactions may fail to settle due to shortfall of
funds on a gross basis in the current accounts of one or more SGL account holders, especially
gridlocks.
Under the Special Funds Facility Scheme, the Reserve Bank would provide
collateralised intra-day credit to banks and primary dealers to facilitate settlement of
securities transactions in case of such gridlocks. Funds provided for this purpose will not be
overnight credit. It will be available for settlement relating to their transactions in
Government of India dated securities, treasury bills and state government securities through
their own SGL accounts as well as in constituent SGL accounts.
Banks and Primary Dealers who are eligible for Collateralised Lending Facility
(CLF)/Liquidity Support Facility (LSF) from the Reserve Bank at the Bank Rate will be
eligible for this facility. Credit will be available on a collaterised basis and will be given
against undrawn CLF/ Primary Dealers Liquidity Support (PDLS).  The drawal would be
restricted to 95 per cent of the face value of outstanding  in reverse repo constituent
SGL account of a participant after providing for successful bids in reverse repo auctions. The
funds will be provided at Bank Rate and the interest cost will be shared equally among all
beneficiary participants involved in the settlement of linked securities transactions. In
addition, a flat fee of Rs. 25 per transaction would be charged from each beneficiary
September 26, 2000
securites
when the transactions are linked.  Such situations are called 
2000-2001 in April 2000.
of gridlock.
gridlocks in security settlement
RBI introduces a special funds facility schemeparticipants. The Reserve Bank will also apply a uniform margin on the transaction. The
The Reserve Bank will constantly review the scheme and modify it as and when
Full details of the scheme are available on the RBI )
Release : 2000-2001/469
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
www.rbi.org.in website (
necessary. If deemed necessary, it could also suspend the scheme.
transaction for this purpose will be reversed on the same day.