Behaviour of Commercial Banks in 
an Analytical and Empirical Study
The Development Research Group (DRG) in the Reserve Bank of India has brought out a study
entitled “Capital Adequacy Requirements and the Behaviour of Commercial Banks in India : An
Analytical and Empirical Study”, the twenty-second in the DRG Study Series. The study is
authored by Prof. , Shri  , Shri   and Shri 
Sahoo.
In the wake of the introduction of prudential regulation as an integral part of financial sector
reforms in India, there has been a growing debate as to whether capital adequacy requirements are
the best means to regulate the banking system.  From cross country experiences, there is some
evidence of a positive association between capitalisation and risk assumption by banks due to the
possibility that the one-size-fits-all capital adequacy ratio (CAR) causes bank leverage and asset
risk to become substitutes.  At policy levels, this has driven research into alternative regulatory
methods.
Against this background, the study investigates the relationship between changes in risk and
capital in the Indian banking sector, with reference to public sector banks ( PSBs).  The study seeks
to identify key variables impinging upon the capital adequacy of banks and to examine evidence
for a shift in bank portfolios towards greater riskiness after the introduction of capital adequacy
norms.  The study also attempts to draw implications of the new capital adequacy framework
proposed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) for the Indian financial system
are :
Given the wide het erogeneity in terms of products and customer preferences among 
as well as the adjustment response of PSBs, the regulatory framework should be designed to
encourage individual banks to maintain higher CAR, over and above the stipulated minimum, so
While capital remains a useful regulatory tool for influencing bank behaviour, there is no
Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) ba sed on capital might prove to be an effective strategy
Capital ratios of banks are a crucial determinant of banks ratings, in the short-term; this has
Alternative approaches such as value at risk ( VaR) and Pre-commitment Approach (PA)
are no substitutes for the wider risk management process of analysing stress scenarios and
monitoring operational and legal risk; they also suffer from limited applicability i.e. for entities
with material trading activities.  The PA needs to be further examined and refined before it can be
The DRG Studies series have an accent on policy-oriented research.  They are released for wide
circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among professional economists and
policy makers on subjects of current interest. The views expressed in these studies are those of the
authors and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank. The study is available on RBI 
.
Release : 2000-2001/460
*****SaibalSeptember 25, 2000
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
http://www.rbi.org.in
website
considered for application in Indian banks.
implications for India in terms of the new BCBS proposal which are built on ratings.
for arresting bank portfolio deterioration.
conclusive evidence that the introduction of CAR has led to risk aversion among banks.
as to reflect differential risk profiles.
PSBs
The major findings of the study 
and evaluates alternative regulatory arrangements as complements to the CAR.
Satyananda Ghosh Narain Aditya D.M.Nachane
India : the 
Capital Adequacy Requirements and