January 13, 2000
The Governor had announced in his Statement on “Mid Term Review of Monetary and
Credit Policy for the Year 1999-2000” issued on October 29, 1999, three major decisions in
relation to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) whereby borrowings from mutual
funds are to be treated outside the purview of public deposits, the NBFCs are required to give
public notice of three months prior to the closure of a branch and/or transfer of
control/management by them. The RBI today announced certain amendments to NBFC
Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions 1998, NBFCs Prudential Norms
(Reserve Bank) Directions 1998, Residuary Non-Banking Companies (Reserve Bank)
Directions 1987 and NBFCs Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions and the Reserve
Bank of India (NBFCs) Returns Specifications 1997, and also exemptions to certain classes
of companies from the provisions of RBI Act, 1934.  In addition, it has also issued
clarifications on directions issued by it earlier. The major modifications announced by the
1. The Reserve Bank has allowed exemption to companies engaged in micro-financing
activities from the provisions of entire Chapter III B including registration; exemption to
all Government companies from maintenance of liquid assets, creation of reserve fund
and all provisions of NBFC Directions except registration; and exemption to potential
nidhi companies from the requirements of registration, liquid assets and reserve fund and
2. The Reserve Bank has introduced certain regulations over opening and closing of
branches with an obligation of the auditors to report non-compliance of these directions to
the Reserve Bank; certain provisions that relate to need for introduction of depositors,
deposits from first named joint shareholders only to be treated outside the purview of
public deposits, minimum period of hybrid or subordinated debt, disclosure requirements
about the exposures to the companies in the same Group, etc.; NBFCs have also been
directed to constitute  Audit Committee,  consisting of not less than three members of its
Board of Directors, if they have assets of more than . 50 crore as per the last audited
Balance Sheet. NBFCs would be required to follow a uniform accounting year of March
31 every year with effect from the accounting year ending with March 31, 2001.They
would also furnish information on suit filed and decreed debts in their Reporting Formats
3. Other major items of changes relate to providing that a part of the liquid assets (up to 5
per cent of public deposits) may be maintained by NBFCs in the form of unencumbered
4. It has been reiterated that the NBFCs having NOF below Rs.25 lakh may not be granted
general exemption and their applications for Certificates Of Registration  may not be
5. It has also been clarified that NBFCs not holding public deposits are no longer required to
submit liquid asset return, NBFCs should carefully appoint their agents for soliciting
deposits because they are responsible as principals for the acts of omission and
commission of their agents, etc.
considered;
bank term deposits with scheduled commercial banks.
submitted to the Reserve Bank.
Rs
also certain provisions of the NBFC Directions.
Reserve Bank today are:
RBI amends NBFC DirectionsNecessary notifications are being issued separately which have also been made available
on the RBI 
Release : 1999/2000/912
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
http:\\www.rbi.org.in. website 