The Reserve Bank of India has published “ Statistical Tables Relating to Banks
in India 1999-2000 ”. This is the 55 edition of the book. The publication presents
comprehensive statistical data on the working of commercial banks (including Regional
The publication is divided into three parts: ( i) Summary Tables, (ii) Detailed
Tables and (iii) Appendix. The summary tables give inter  consolidated data in
respect of selected items of liabilities and assets of banks and also their earnings and
expenses. The detailed tables provide data on liabilities and assets, income and
expenditures, contingent liabilities, movements of non-performing assets (
provisions and contingencies, maturity pattern of selected items of liabilities and assets,
selected profitability and other financial ratios of individual banks. The appendix
The publication also presents some useful information in respect of scheduled
commercial banks on: ( i) maturity pattern of term deposits, (ii) ownership of deposits,
of number of offices, deposits, credit and number of employees, (vi) deposits and credit
The publication is priced at Rs.175 (Rs.225 by registered book post) and US $50
(by registered air mail). It can be obtained from the Director, Division of Reports,
Reviews and Publication (Sales section), Department of Economic Analysis and Policy,
Reserve Bank of India, Amar Building (Ground Floor), P. B. No.1036, Mumbai – 400
001. 
Release : 2000-2001/757 Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
http://www.rbi.org.in Mumbai. The data can also be accessed through Internet at 
favour of the “Reserve Bank of India”, payable at Cheques/drafts should be drawn in 
nationalisation, etc. of offices opened after 
(iii) investments, (iv) advances to priority sectors, (v) state/population group-wise details
furnishes  details of commercial banks’ offices in all States and Union Territories.
NPAs),
alia
previous years.
Rural Banks) in India during 1999-2000 along with revised data, where available, for the
th
November 20, 2000
Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India 1999-2000