Y2K Status on January 3, 2000
January 3, 2000
On January 3, 2000, the first full working day of the year, the Reserve Bank of
India, banks and financial institutions have been found to be working satisfactorily on the
The MICR Cheque processing centre at Mumbai using the state-of-the-art
Mainframe has completed processing of at par items clearing successfully today.  MICR
cheque processing at National Clearing Centres of the RBI at Mumbai, New Delhi,
Chennai and Calcutta have commenced the processing work of MICR cheques in the late
afternoon today as per the established procedure.  These systems were already
successfully tested in live environment during the rollover and on January 1, 2000.  The
computerized clearing operations based on Magnetic Media Based Clearing System
(MMBCS) at all Regional Offices of the Reserve Bank have worked smoothly.  The
processing of Electronic Services transactions (both debit and credit) and Electronic
Funds Transfer was also carried out.
The banking Departments of the Reserve Bank of India maintaining the accounts
of banks, financial institutions and Governments at its Regional Offices successfully
booked all the transactions today.  The Central Accounts Section, Nagpur confirmed that
they completed government accounts at the close of business on December 31, 1999 by
02.00 hours on January 1, 2000.  Today they have started processing the inter
The processing of the reports received from currency chests maintained by the
banks on behalf of the Reserve Bank has been successfully done by the Issue Offices of
The cross border inward and outward communications have started moving on
SWIFT in the Department of External Investments and Operations (DEIO) of the Reserve
All banks and financial institutions have reported normal functioning during the
forenoon of today without any problem.  Those bank branches, which were open to
public transactions on Sunday, January 2, 2000, have also reported normal operations.  In
the case of State Bank of India, 103 such branches (open on Sunday) reported normal
operations, after successfully processing 18,000 transactions.  All the 
branches working on Sunday of Punjab National Bank, State Bank of Mysore and ANZ
Grindlays Bank have reported normal functioning.
computerised
Banks and other financial entities
Bank.
the banks.
government and agency bank transactions.
Reserve Bank of India
basis of the reports received.A couple of banks reported minor glitches in a few software which were quickly
All the ATMs have been reported to 
All the Indian banks having operations at international centres also reported
All the scheduled urban cooperative banks and major financial institution s have
Release : 1999/2000/864
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
computerised operations. reported normal functioning in respect of their 
normal functioning.
have functioned normally.
set right without any impact on business continuity.