The procedure for valuation of investments based on the revised
classification of the securities as recommended by the Informal Group on
Valuation of Banks' Investment Portfolio set up by the Reserve Bank, will be
made effective for the balance sheet as at March 31, 2001, the Reserve Bank of
India stated in a press release issued today. The Reserve Bank will shortly be
issuing detailed guidelines in this regard.  For the current financial year ending
March 31, 2000, the Reserve Bank would announce the year-end yield-to-
It may be recalled that in the Statement on “ Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the Year 1999 – 2000” announced by the
Governor, Reserve Bank of India in October 1999, a reference was made to the
recommendations of an Informal Group on Valuation of Banks' Investment
Portfolio set up by the Reserve Bank, relating to valuation of investments in the
light of international practices.  The Group had recommended that banks may
classify their investments in government and other approved securities into three
the existing practice of classifying them into `current’ and `permanent’ categories
in the proportion advised by the Reserve Bank from time to time.  The Group had
also recommended, inter alia, discontinuance of the Reserve Bank’s practice of
banks for comments for taking a final decision on the procedure for valuation of
investments to be adopted by banks with effect from April 1, 2000.  The
of banks in a meeting held on February 17, 2000. All the chief executives
conveyed the view that the Group’s recommendations were in line with
international best practices and could be accepted.  They, however, requested that
since the institutional framework for valuation of banks' investment portfolio will
take some time, the Reserve Bank may announce YTMs for government and
Press Release No. 1999-2000/1271
General manager
Alpana Killawala
approved securities for the year 1999-2000.
recommendations of the Informal Group were discussed with the chief executives
The summary of the recommendations of the Group was circulated among
YTMs for valuation purposes. prescribing year-end 
categories, viz., `held for trading’, `available for sale’, and `permanent’ in place of
Mid-Term
maturity (YTM) rates as in the past.
March 22, 2000
Valuation of Investments in Approved Securities