July 31, 2000
As a measure of further  and to facilitate prospective investors to
invest through the agency of their choice, with effect from August 1, 2000, the Reserve
Bank of India has  branches of four private sector banks and Stock Holding
Corporation of India (SHCIL) to receive subscriptions for the 9% Relief Bonds. Four
private sector banks that have been authorised to receive subscription to the Relief Bonds
are: HDFC Bank Ltd., ICICI Bank Ltd., UTI Bank Ltd. and IDBI Bank Ltd. Now 93
branches of these agencies will also be able to receive subscription, issue and service 9%
Relief Bonds along with select branches of public sector banks that are already authorised
to do the work.  The number of bank branches accepting and servicing Relief Bonds has
today increased to 850 giving the investing public a much wider choice to invest in Relief
Bonds in a branch convenient to it. Apart from agency branches, 15 Reserve Bank offices
The designated agency branches offer Relief Bonds in dematerialised ( demat)
form, i.e., they issue these Bonds in the form of a bond ledger account opened in the
name of investor. The Bonds held in the form of a bond ledger account with a bank not
only protect the investor from theft or loss of Bond certificates but also facilitate payment
The Relief Bonds are a preferred investment avenue with investing public as the
interest earned on these Bonds is totally free from Income Tax. These are also Wealth
Tax exempt without limit. The Bonds also offer nomination facility, easy transferability
and are accepted as security against loans. Having five-year maturity period, the
minimum investment in 9% Relief Bonds is Rs.1, 000 and its multiples with no upper
limit on investments. Any individual/HUF is eligible to apply. Joint holding and holdings
of these Bonds on behalf of minors are also allowed. Non-Resident Indians are eligible to
invest in these bonds subject to Exchange Control regulations. The interest on these
Bonds is payable half-yearly with cumulative and non-cumulative options. The interest is
The Government of India pays a brokerage of one rupee per Rs. 100 to brokers
and PPF/UTI agents registered with receiving offices on subscriptions received through
them. Brokers and PPF/UTI agents registered with the Reserve Bank are paid a brokerage
of 50 demat form. No brokerage is paid on
applications for 
Application forms and a list of designated agency branches are available on the
RBI website at  , at designated agency branches and also at RBI
Press Release No. 2000-2001/164
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
offices.
www.goirb.rbi.org.in
G.P. notes at RBI offices.
Rs. 100 if the bonds are purchased in paise for 
paid on these Bonds even after maturity if not redeemed.
of half-yearly interest and repayment at the branch itself.
also accept and service Relief Bonds.
authorised
decentralisation
Subscription for 9% Relief Bonds
Now Five More Agencies to receive