November 29, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India has set up a multi-disciplinary working group to look into
introduction of risk based internal inspection/audit in banks in India and to make
1. Shri G. :
2. Shri K. L. :
3. Shri A. L. :
4. Shri N. L. :
Bank of India, Head Office, 
5. Shri N. S. :
Baroda
Head Office, 
6. :
7. Shri R. M. :
Secretarial support to the Working Group will be provided by the Central
Office of the Department of Banking Supervision of the Reserve Bank of India. The
terms of reference of the Working Group are :
Mumbai
Department of Banking Supervision
Reserve Bank of India
Dy. General Manager
Member-Secretary Thakkar
State Bank of India
Dy. General Manager
Member Nagarajan Shri R. 
Mumbai
Bank of 
General Manager
Member Srinivasan
Mumbai
General Manager
Member Ajwalia
Mumbai Central Office, 
Department of Banking Operations & Development
Reserve Bank of India
Chief General Manager
Member Narasimhan
Mumbai Central Office, 
Department of Banking Supervision
Reserve Bank of India
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Member Khetarpaul
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
President
Chairman Sitharaman
suitable recommendations. The composition of the Working Group is:
Internal Inspection/Audit in Banks
RBI Working Group on Risk based1. To examine the applicability of the risk based internal audit and to propose the
methodology for implementing the shift in focus from transaction to risk based
approach.
2. To prepare guidelines to be issued to the banks with regard to risk assessment
3. To suggest modifications with regard to the existing internal audit practices in
banks which may be required to implement the shift in focus to risk based
approach.
4. To outline timeframe and sequencing of the measures required for
5. Any other matter which the Working Group may think as of relevance to risk
The Working Group at its first meeting may decide the exact issues for
deliberation within the parameters outlined above. The Group will submit its report by
January 31, 2001.
Internal audit procedures have been defined as an independent, objective
assurance and consultative activity. These procedures help an organisation to
accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic and disciplined approach to
evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance
processes. Adherence to the internal operational guidelines and procedures has gained
more importance in recent times in view of the deregulatory process initiated by the
Reserve Bank of India in important areas of banking operations, particularly in regard
to prudential concerns and risk management practices. Recent international
experience has also highlighted the need to have risk based internal inspection/audit in
the banks. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, used in July 2000 a
consultative paper on `Internal Audit in Banking Organisations and the Relationship
of the Supervisory Authorities with Internal and External Auditors'. The paper lays
Release : 2000-2001/804
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
emphasis on risk focussed internal audit.
based internal audit in the banks.
implementation of the Group's recommendations.
methodology and audit plan.