November 3, 2000
Addressing the Conference of the Finance Secretaries of states, Dr. Bimal 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India said, "Given India's potential and strength to grow, it is our
collective responsibility to put our systems in a way that the full potential could be realised." In
this context, he emphasised the coordinated efforts of the Centre, the States and the Reserve
Bank of India in improving the systems which is also reflected in the tremendous confidence
shown by the world in India's immense potential to grow. The conference of Finance Secretaries
of States was held today in the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.  The conference is held twice a
year and has assumed significance as a forum for the State Finance Secretaries for constructive
exchange of ideas.  Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance also regularly participate in
Sharing his thoughts on the international and domestic developments on the macro-
economic front in the recent past, the Governor pointed out that in the aftermath of the Asian
Crisis, the strength of the banking system and fiscal deficit have emerged as the most significant
focal points in any economy and are constantly watched by observers. In a 
environment, the developments in international markets have increasing impact on domestic
markets, he stated. The Governor pointed out that fiscal deficit is no longer an issue having a
bearing on domestic inflation alone but also has impact on the interest rates.  In other words,
fiscal deficit affects the financial markets and, therefore, gets closely watched by market
participants the world over.
In the Indian context, therefore, it is the collective responsibility of the centre and the
states to make serious efforts to contain fiscal deficit.  He noted that the centre and the states
have, in the recent past, been considering steps towards containing fiscal deficit. The Governor
stressed that in the efforts to adhere to international standards, transparency would be of great
significance. "Transparency will help better understanding of our systems by international
observers," he contended. Against this backdrop, the Governor also stressed on collective
responsibility in tackling issues, such as, reducing consumption expenditure or reducing
demands on Government for non-productive, non-plan expenditure.  Dr. Jalan emphasised that
obtaining adequate returns on assets created out of government funds should be considered as a
 
 Setting up of an informal technical group to update the system of ways and means
advances for states broadly as per the Vithal Committee recommendations with a
mandate to 
 Familiarising the states with the operation of primary dealers system for market
 Arrangements for monitoring the guarantees given by states including letters of comfort.
 Arrangements for greater interaction between the credit rating agencies and the state
governments.
Killawala
General Manager
Release : 2000-2001/ 670
Press 
Alpana 
v)
iv)
borrowings;
iii)
finalise the report by end December 2000;
ii)
Constitution of a group on analysis of interest burden on states; i)
The subsequent technical sessions concluded the following:
key component of any effort to reduce fiscal deficit.
globalised
the conference.
Jalan,
Fiscal Situation and Financial Markets
Collective Efforts to improve
emphasises Need for RBI Governor 