Government Borrowing  : says RBI
July 29, 2000
Underlying fundamentals are conducive for supporting government borrowing
programme. The recent experience of private placements cum tap sale of two securities,
viz., 11 per cent Government Stock, 2006 and 11.30 per cent Government Stock 2010
indicated that there was still an underlying appetite for the long term loan. Given such
conducive environment, the government would continue to focus on elongating the
maturity profile of its securities and achieve a balance between short term and long term
papers in a cost-effective manner. This was stated by Shri P R Gopala Rao, Executive
Director, Reserve Bank of India while inaugurating a money and securities market
conference held in Hyderabad today. The Reserve Bank, as the debt manager of the
Government, would pursue appropriate policies to help the government achieve this
Elaborating on this further, the executive director said that the net market borrowing
programme for the current fiscal was budgeted at a Rs.76 ,383 crore. With the repayment
obligations at Rs.41,321 crore, the gross borrowing requirements of the Central
Government amount to Rs. 1,17,704 crore. So far, the Government had raised Rs.56,683
crore (gross) representing 48 per cent of the total targetted borrowing. He further added
that there was a strong possibility that the market borrowings would not exceed the
budgeted amount as the relative budgetary variables had been estimated pragmatically
making it possible for the Government and the Reserve Bank to continue with its policy
On the recent monetary measures announced by the Reserve Bank of India, the executive
director explained that the measures were warranted by technical factors to address the
what are otherwise construed as transitory developments in the market. He pointed out
that there was an uptrend in the yields of government paper even before the measures
were announced. In this context, he urged the market participants to rationalise the
Dwelling further on the role of primary dealers, the executive director stated that the
primary dealers should play a role in stabilising the markets for Government securities.
Pointing out that adequate support was extended by the Reserve Bank to the primary
dealers in their endeavour to meet their goals, the executive director advised them to
He said the institutional role of the primary dealers was one of market-making.  He
desired that the primary dealers should enhance their lending and borrowings through the
repo market. Apart from imparting liquidity, this would help enlarge the secondary repo
market.
Referring to the discussion on the development of the retail market for Government
securities, the executive director stated that technological upgradation was a part of the
reform of debt market. He informed that the Reserve Bank was planning to set up an
Electronic Dealing System to facilitate electronic bidding in the auctions and also dealing
in Government securities and money market instruments among market players and with
the Reserve Bank. According to the executive director, the Reserve Bank’s initiative
would provide the market greater transparency on prices and volumes traded on real time
basis. To facilitate settlement in Government securities transactions, dealing system
would be linked to securities settlement system in the public debt offices of the Reserve
Bank. This would include screen based trade reporting system for settlement supported
by the Reserve Bank’s INFINET as the communications backbone.
gradually become self-dependent and explore additional sources of funds.
developments contextually.
objectives.
objective, he added.
Programme
Underlying Fundamentals are Conducive for SupportingIn this context, he noted that a proposal to set up a debt clearing corporation was received
from the primary dealers and action to establish such a corporation was being initiated.
He added that a core group was set up to prepare the project road map for setting up of
the clearing corporation for debt securities. He pointed out that to begin with, the clearing
corporation would be for settlement of all Government securities and other debt securities
in demat form to facilitate repo transactions by all the market participants as also for
money market and forex settlement. He hoped that the new system would broaden the
participation in the auction system and improve the speed of settlement of secondary
market transactions. He also hoped that some more concrete suggestions would emerge
Stating that the policy making process at the Reserve Bank was now consultative and
quite transparent, Shri Gopala Rao said that from July 31, the Reserve Bank would
announce the results of its liquidity adjustment facility at 12. 30 p.m. He hoped that this
measure would give the market participants sufficient time to assess their funds
requirements and act appropriately. Currently, the Reserve Bank announces the LAF
results at 1 p.m. Many market players, including some primary dealers had, among other
things, suggested that the Reserve Bank should advance the time for announcing the
results of LAF so as to enable the market players to adjust their liquidity in the market, if
need be, after the Reserve Bank’s auction is completed. Emphasising that the scheme of
liquidity adjustment faciltiy was working well, the executive director affirmed that it
eventually would meet its ultimate objective in providing desirable quantum of liquidity
according to the needs of the system with flexible rates as also helping the short term
Release : 2000/2001/156
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
money market interest rates move within a corridor and impart greater stability.
out of the deliberations at the conference.