The purpose of this Statement is to clarify some issues/questions that have been raised in
the media and elsewhere by analysts, commentators, market participants and others
regarding recent developments in the foreign exchange markets, and Reserve Bank’s
In order to consider short-term developments in the value of the rupee vis-a-vis US
dollars in proper perspective, it is necessary to pay attention to what is happening to the
value of dollar in relation to other major currencies during the period. Yesterday (August
2, 2000), for example, the rupee depreciated against the dollar by 21 paise (over the
reference rate on August 1, 2000) or less than 0.5 per cent. On the same day, dollar
appreciated against Euro by 1.1 per cent and by 0.2 per cent against Pound sterling.
Similarly, between 1 July 2000 and 2 August, dollar appreciated by nearly 4.0 per cent
against Euro, by 3.2 per cent against Yen, and about 1.5 per cent against Sterling as well
as the rupee. As a result of the movement of US dollar against these currencies, rupee
 against Euro by as much as 2.5 per cent, and by 1.5 per cent against Yen,
and remained stable against sterling. These currencies (Euro, Pound and Yen) are
Thus, while it is true that rupee has depreciated against the dollar last month, it is equally
true that rupee has sharply appreciated or remained stable against currencies of its other
major trading partners in Europe, U.K., and Japan. Going beyond the dollar, and taking
the movement of the rupee against other major currencies, it is simply wrong to say that
Frequent references have been made in recent days to the effect of increase in prices of
crude oil internationally on India’s trade and the effect that this may have on the
exchange rate. The increase the prices of imported oil has indeed been high. It is also true
1
Statement by the Reserve Bank of India on recent
The “Oil Effect” and the ”Inflation Effect”
rupee has hit “an all time low”.
currencies of India’s other major trading and investment partners.
strengthened
Strengthening of US dollar against Rupee and other Currencies
response to these developments. The Statement does not contain any new measures.
developments in the Foreign Exchange Marketsthat this increases in import bill substantially.  However, it is important to remember that
prices of crude oil were also very high last year also. (They were close to $ 25 per barrel
at the end of December 1999 as against about $ 26 on August 2, 2000). And yet, last year
we added to
The other point that has been made is the effect of higher rate of inflation on the value of
the rupee. The major reason for increase in the rate of inflation in the recent period in
India is the increase in the prices of petroleum products, including mineral oils, etc.
Excluding  this impact of an external factor, the annual rate of inflation in India currently
is less than 4 per cent.  In the US and Europe as well as several other countries, it is
normal to exclude the effect of oil prices, and certain other prices, for determining the
core inflation rate for purposes of monetary policy decisions and inter-country
As pointed out in statements, RBI does not use short-term movements in Real Effective
Exchange Rates (REER), or any other similar variable, as an indicator of appropriateness
or otherwise of exchange rate movements in the short-run. However, as these measures
have some importance for research and analysis of longer term trends in international
competitiveness, RBI releases figures of REER in its monthly bulletin for different base
year levels using both 5-country and 36-country currency trade weights. The present
imputed value of rupee per US dollar, based on the REER (5 country currency trade
:
(August 2, 2000)
(August 2, 2000)
Base Year, 1991-92 :
:
Despite the increase in our oil import bill as well as increase in non-oil imports in the
wake of industrial recovery, the current account deficit in India is still less than 2 per cent
2
Base Year 1993-94
Rs.45.01 per US Dollar
Rs.38.38 per US dollar
Imputed value of rupee per US Dollar based on REER
Rs.45.34 per US dollar Present Value of Rupee
weight which is the latest available), is given below:
comparison of inflationary pressures.
 our reserves by US $ 5.5 billion.of GDP, which is considered by international standards to be low and reasonable.  India's
exports have also been doing exceptionally well in the current year. There has, no doubt,
been a substantial outflow on account of FII funds in the months of June and July 2000,
which has reduced the net volume of capital inflows into the country.  The FII funds, by
their very nature, tend to be somewhat volatile, and our reserve policy in the last few
years has taken this factor into account. India very much welcomes FII inflows, but at the
same time, we are aware that these flows in the short run can be affected by legitimate
(in Billions of US $)
previousyear)
20.8 25.2
17.0 21.7 -3.5
22.4 26.4 4.7
26.0 29.4 3.0
29.5 32.5 3.1
35.0 38.0 5.5
As can be seen, in the last four years we have added as much as US $ 16 billion to our
reserves. The build-up of reserves is a result of conscious policy which takes into account
the changing composition of balance of payments and “liquidity risks” associated with
different types of flows and other requirements. As explained in the Monetary and Credit
“The policy for reserve management is judiciously built upon a host of identifiable
factors and other contingencies. Such factors inter alia include: the size of the current
account deficit; the size of short-term liabilities (including current repayment obligations
on long-term loans); the possible variability in portfolio investments and other types of
capital flows; the unanticipated pressures on the balance of payments arising out of
external shocks (such as, the impact of the East Asian crisis in 1997-98 or increase in oil
3
Policy Statement for the year 2000-2001:
March 2000
March 1999
March 1998
March 1997
March 1996
March 1995
Reserves (over Reserves CurrencyAssets
Inc(+)/Dec(-)in Foreign Exchange Foreign End of Month/Year
Foreign  Exchange Reserves Movement in 
The movement in India’s foreign exchange reserves in the last five years is shown below:
Movement in India’s reserves
corporate considerations, including developments in markets of other countries. foreign currency deposits of Non-
It was further pointed out that:
“Unanticipated domestic or external developments, including undue volatility in asset
prices in equity/bond markets, can create disproportionate pressures in the foreign
exchange market in emerging economies. It is, therefore, essential to continue with the
pursuit of realistic and credible exchange rate policies, in addition to vigorous
implementation of domestic and external sector reforms to further strengthen the balance
The reserve management policy pursued by India in the last few years has stood us well
and enabled us to cope with various unanticipated events, such as, the East-Asian crisis,
imposition of sanctions by several industrial countries a couple of years ago, the 
conflict, and changes in Government at home .  Our reserves at the present level are
strong, and are high enough to take care of any temporary adverse developments in
demand as well as capital flows, particularly if unnecessary and unwarranted “panic” is
avoided . The Government has also take several measures to enhance the flows of capital,
particularly foreign direct investments, and as a result of these efforts, it is expected that
In earlier statements as well as the statement made by the Reserve Bank on May 25,2000
(and in the annual and half-yearly monetary policy statements), it has been stated that,
RBI does not “target” a specific exchange rate in determining its intervention policy or
the timing of monetary policy and other measures announced by it from time to time.
Yet, whenever rupee reaches or is close to a “round number” or a particular level (such
as, “the lowest ever in this year” or “in the recent past” in terms of the dollar), it is
presumed by analysts that RBI would or should intervene strongly to defend that
particular level. If RBI’s action at that level is absent or mild, this adds to certain element
4
Timing of RBI decisions
we will see a substantial increase in these inflows during the course of current year.
Kargil
of payments position over the medium term.”
Resident Indians.”
repatriable prices in 1999-2000); and movements in the of speculation about RBI’s comfort level or intentions, which in turn creates uncertainties
The simple point is that when RBI says that it does not “target” a particular level of the
exchange rate, it is intended to convey that there is no specific level which it is prepared
to defend, through unlimited sales of foreign currency and/or through introduction of
strong monetary and other measures. The RBI’s view is that past international experience
has abundantly made it clear that the defence of a “fixed” previously set target by central
banks in developing, as indeed in industrial countries, is simply not practical or desirable
in a regime of flexible exchange rates. This was abundantly brought out during the East
Asian crisis in 1997 and in Latin America in 1998 (as well as in India’s case in
November 1997 in the wake of the Asian crisis). It has also been the experience of
several industrial countries at different times, including Japan. The announcement of a
pre-fixed “target”, or a commitment to this effect, leads to one way speculation in the
currency and can result in a surge in the demand for foreign currency. The erosion in
foreign exchange reserves may become unsustainable, leading to abandonment of the pre-
announced peg.
The fact that RBI does not target a particular exchange rate does not mean that
movements in the exchange market, irrespective of the pace and its level, are matter of no
concern and can be ignored. It is also possible that at some levels, which happen to be
round numbers, certain measures can be taken. These are, however, not designed to
defend the rate at that particular level. (It may be mentioned that while the July 21
measures were taken when rupee was close to a round number, May 25 statement by RBI
was made when rupee-dollar value was 44.29. At that time, interestingly, nobody
observed that this is a “Lakshman Rekha” which RBI must defend to maintain its
5
“Speculative” Vs.”Genuine” demand for foreign exchange
credibility!)
and a rush to the market.  This issue, therefore, deserves some further clarification.India has already taken measures to reduce purely speculative demand for foreign
exchange or inter-bank speculation. At the same time, it has to be recognised that, outside
of purely speculative demand,  “leads and lags” in respect of genuine import demand and
export repatriation can also have a very large effect on the demand and supply position in
forex markets in the short run. This is because during periods of uncertainty and adverse
expectations, genuine importers tend to bunch their demands and enter the market to meet
their present requirements as well as their future requirements. Similarly, exporters may
hold back genuine export receipts in anticipation of further depreciation. Thus, while the
relative absence of pure currency speculation in our markets is helpful, it does not
eliminate short-term pressures in the foreign exchange market by genuine
exporters/importers in anticipation of future value of the currency.  Thus, even when the
sudden accumulation of demand is genuine, it may become necessary to intervene or take
Monetary measures announced by RBI on July 21, 2000, reflected  RBI’s
assessment of developments in the domestic and international markets in regard to
liquidity as well as movements in international interest rates abroad, which had hardened
considerably over the past year (while Indian interest rates came down substantially).
These measures were not designed to defend a specific rate. The purpose of the measures
was to shift, at the margin , the relative cost of buying rupees vis-a-vis foreign currencies
in the short-run. These measures were deliberately spaced out, and the quantum of
increase was smaller than what would have been required to defend a particular rate.
As already announced, the Reserve Bank will continue to intervene directly or indirectly
in the market to meet temporary demand and supply mis-matches. It will also directly
meet partially or fully, without entering the market, the foreign exchange requirements
for import of crude oil by the Indian Oil Corporation and for Government debt service
6
What Would RBI do next?
Why recent Monetary Measures by RBI?
measures to stabilise expectations, if feasible.payments, as considered necessary. (This has the effect of reducing lumpy and
“unpostponeable” market demand for foreign exchange). Reserve Bank will also continue
to monitor developments in the market very closely, and take such further measures as
may be necessary from time to time in order to stabilise expectations, to the extent
management of external markets are pro-active and thereby reasonable. It is hoped that
markets and help accelerate growth of output and exports.
7
take decisions, which are most conducive to promoting orderly conditions in forex
above clarifications will help market participants, including exporters and importers, to
India’s fundamentals are strong, our reserves are high and our policies for
feasible, and to help reduce the effects of “leads” and “lags”.