February 25, 2000
Micro credit extended by the banks to individual borrowers directly or
through intermediary would be reckoned as part of their priority sector lending.
This was stated by the Reserve Bank of India in a circular prescribing guidelines for
micro credit.  The circular was issued recently by the Reserve Bank to all scheduled
In the circular, micro credit has been defined as the provision of thrift, credit
and other financial services and products of very small amount to the poor in rural,
semi-urban and urban areas for enabling them to raise their income levels and
improve living standards.  Micro credit institutions are those which provide these
The Reserve Bank guid elines intend to provide maximum flexibility to the
banks in regard to micro lending in order to enable them to evoke their own
model(s) or choose any conduit/intermediary keeping in view the prevalent local
conditions and the need for provision of finance to the poor.  The guidelines have
therefore not specified any interest rate nor have they prescribed any targets to be
achieved for micro lending.  According to the Reserve Bank guidelines, banks can
devise their own model(s), prescribe their own criteria for selection of micro credit
While not prescribing any criteria for selection of micro credit
, the Reserve Bank  have, however, indicated to banks that it
might be desirable for them to deal with micro credit  having proper
credentials, track record, system of maintaining accounts and records with regular
The Reserve Bank has also advised banks to formulate their own model(s)
or choose any conduit/intermediary for extending micro credit.  Banks may choose
suitable branches/pockets/areas where micro credit programmes can be
implemented.  The Reserve Bank has, however, suggested that it might be useful
for banks to start with a selected small area and concentrate fully on the poor in that
area and then with the experience gained replicate the arrangements in other
Similarly, the Reserve Bank has asked the banks to prescribe their own
asked to devise appropriate loan and savings products and the related terms and
conditions including the size of the loan, unit cost, unit size, maturity period, grace
period margins, etc. The Reserve Bank has indicated that such credit should cover
not only consumption and production loans for various farm and non-farm activities
of the poor but also include their other credit needs, such as, housing and shelter
The Reserve Bank has left the interest rates applicable to loans extended to
micro credit orgnaisations or by the micro credit organisations to self-help
groups/member beneficiaries to the discretion of the banks.  It has, however, stated
that the interest rate ceiling applicable to direct small loans given by banks to
The Reserve Bank has asked banks to include micro credit in branch credit
district credit plan and state credit plan.  While no target has
been prescribed for micro credit, banks are required to accord utmost priority to the
micro credit sector in preparation of these plans.  As per the RBI guidelines, micro
credit should also form an integral part of the bank's corporate credit plan and
organisationsguidleines1
plan, block credit plan, 
individual borrowers would continue to remain in force.
improvements.
lending norms keeping in view the ground realities.  The banks have, however, been
selected areas.
audits in place and manpower for closer supervision and follow-up.
organisations
organisation and lending norms as also interest rates for micro lending.
facilities.
commercial banks.
Banks’ Priority Sector Lending
Micro Credit to be part ofshould be reviewed at the highest level on a quarterly basis.  For augmenting flow
of micro credit, banks have been asked to remove all operational irritants and make
arrangements to expeditiously sanction and disburse micro credit by delegating
adequate sanctioning powers to branch managers.  Banks have also been asked to
simplify the loan application forms, procedures and documents to provide prompt
and hassle-free micro credit.  Banks have to furnish a statement to the Reserve
Bank on a half-yearly basis indicating the amount of micro credit disbursed by the
It may be recalled that a micro credit special cell was set up in the Reserve
Bank to suggest measures for augmenting flow of micro credit.  A task force on
supportive policy and regulatory framework for micro credit was also set up by the
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. Both the groups have since
Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 1999/2000/1141
2
Ajit 
submitted their reports.
bank.