RBI prescribes Prudential Norms for
Takeout Finance by Financial Institutions
January 24, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India has prescribed certain prudential norms to be followed by
both, the lending and taking-over financial institutions, in the case of takeout finance.  In
a circular issued to all financial institutions earlier this month, the Reserve Bank has
stated that it has examined the issue pertaining to the criteria for assigning risk weights
and applying other prudential norms in respect of takeout finance by banks and financial
institutions.  It has advised the financial institutions to assign risk weights and apply
Unconditional takeover Credit conversion factor
(
(a) Where the full credit Not applicable since it is 20 per cent
Risk is assumed by the not an off balance sheet
 Where only partial    -do- 20 per cent on the amount
credit risk is assumed to be taken over
by taking over 100% on the amount not to
100 per cent 100 per cent on the amount
to be taken over
Conditional takeover
 Not applicable since it will 100 per cent
not be off balance sheet
 50 per cent 100 per cent
Note : In the above cases where the counter party risk is guaranteed by Government the
risk weight will be zero.
Where the credit facility becomes a non-performing asset before take over by the taking
Lending institution Taking over institution
 
 Income not to be recognised on ( )  No obligations would arise till the
asset is actually  taken over.
accrual basis
i (ii)
Should be classified as NPA (i)
over institution:
Income Recognition and Provisioning
Taking over institution (ii)
item
Lending institution (i)
(ii)  Taking over institution
be taken over institution
(b)
item taking over institution
i) Lending Institution
Risk Weight
Risk Weight
income recognition and provision norms in the case of take out finance as under: Provision to be made appropriate to (ii) On taking over such assets should
make  provisions treating the account
 As and when the asset is taken over as NPA  from the actual date of it
by the taking over institution, the becoming  NPA even though the
corresponding provision could be account was not in its books on that
date.
In its circular, the Reserve Bank has stated that prescribing of prudential norms for
financial institutions entering into takeout finance arrangements had become necessary as
in order to meet the financing requirements of infrastructure projects, financial
institutions/banks have been increasingly taking recourse to the new product of takeout
Under a takeout finance arrangement, the financial institution/bank financing an
infrastructure project (lending institution) transfers the outstanding of such financing to
the books of another financial institution (taking over institution) on a pre-determined
basis.  Takeout finance helps the banks in asset-liabilities management since they finance
infrastructure which requires long term funds out of their resources which are short-term.
There are several variants of takeout finance but basically they are either in the nature of
unconditional takeout finance or conditional takeout finance, though it may involve
taking over institutions assuming full credit risk or a part of it.  Takeout finance involves
three parties, viz., project company, lending bank/financial institution and the taking over
institution.  The company recognises the takeout finance arrangement by way of an inter-
creditor agreement.
Release : 1999-2000/964
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
finance.
reversed.
(iv)
the asset classification.
(iii)