RBI to issue Banknotes in
Denomination of Rs.1000
October 5, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India will issue with effect from October 9, 2000,
banknotes in the denomination of Rs.1000 in the Mahatma Gandhi series
The notes bear the signature of Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve
Bank. The length of the note is 177 mm and the width is 73 mm. The notes
The design, colour scheme and other salient features of these notes are:
The overall colour scheme is generally pink (light peach colour with grey
off-set background).  The Mahatma Gandhi portrait is printed in grey
colour, which is in contrast to the general background colour scheme.  The
Mahatma's portrait, numeral 1000, RBI seal, RBI legend, guarantee and
An important feature introduced on these notes is that the numeral `1000'
above the legend  is printed in Optically Variable Ink, viz., 
colour-shifting ink. The colour of the numeral `1000' appears green when
the note is held flat but would change to blue when the note is held at an
The note also has the other usual security features, viz., the watermark, the
security thread, 
The watermark window has the portrait of Mahatma Gandhi with light and
shade effect and a readable window security thread alternately visible on the
The security thread appears to the left of the Mahatma's portrait. It is partly
embedded and partly visible on the obverse but is totally embedded on the
reverse.  One can also read the inscription , 1000 and RBI in the
A see through register in the shape of lotus flower has also been
incorporated in the note wherein the design of the window around the water
mark on the obverse fits into the design on the reverse around the water
The latent image `1000’ appears in the red vertical band behind the
Mahatma's portrait. This can be seen clearly if the note is held flat at the eye
level. The latent image is printed by intaglio process and can also be felt by
touch.
Micro-letters containing "RBI" and "1000" appear alternately behind the
Mahatma's portrait.
This note also contains a small raised feature in diamond shape on the left-
hand side of the watermark window above the Ashoka Pillar inset to
facilitate the visually impaired in identifying the denomination.
mark.
security thread.
obverse but totally embedded on the reverse.
the latent image, as also, micro-letters.
angle.
a
promise clauses and the Governor's signature are printed by intaglio process.
Obverse
are printed in a combination of offset and intaglio processes.
bearing the Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the watermark.The numbers at the top right are printed in blue. The numbers are in red
The central theme of the note printed on the reverse depicts the overall
development of the Indian economy.  The theme is printed in three colours,
viz., brown, red and black by intaglio process and can be felt by touch.  A
vertical panel containing the denomination of the note in 15 languages
Release : 2000-2001/527
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
appears on the left.
Reverse
colour at the left lower portion of the note.