Safety and Soundness of Banking  -
Need for a System of Prompt Corrective Action:
July 31, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India has prepared a discussion paper on Prompt Corrective Action
(PCA).  The discussion paper has been placed on the website www.rbi.org.in for wider
discussion, debate and suggestions among banks, financial institutions, market players
and academia.  Suggestions may be sent within a month by e-mail to
 or  or sent by post to the Chief General
Manager-in-Charge, Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve Bank of India, World
Trade 
Background
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which sets global supervisory 
evolved 25 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. The Principles are in the
nature of minimum requirements intended to guide supervisory authorities who are
seeking to strengthen their current supervisory regime. One of the Core Principles
mandates that banking supervisors must have at their disposal adequate supervisory
measures, backed by legal sanctions, to bring about timely corrective action when banks
fail to meet prudential requirements, such as, minimum capital adequacy ratios, etc.,
when there are regulatory violations or where their depositors are threatened in any other
way.  In the extreme circumstances, this should include the ability to revoke the banking
licence or recommend its revocation.  The penal actions range from restricting the current
activities of the bank, withholding approval of new activities or acquisitions, restricting
or suspending payment to shareholders, restricting asset transfers, restrictions on
discretionary powers of managers, directors or controlling owners, arranging a take-over
Identifying problem banks early is one of the responsibilities of bank supervisors.  The
other responsibility is to monitor the behaviour of troubled banks in an attempt either to
prevent failure or to limit losses.  There is a constant search for appropriate supervisory
strategies to avoid bank failures as they can have a destabilising effect on the economy.
If a bank is not to be allowed to fail, it is essential that corrective action is taken well in
are sought to be achieved by establishing a system of Prompt Corrective
Action (PCA ) with various trigger points and graded mandatory and discretionary
responses by the supervisors.  The proposed structured early intervention in the banking
sector is in tune with international best practices.  PCA is a framework of supervisory
actions for insured depository institutions that are not adequately capitalised.  Similar
PCA regime operates in a number of emerging market economies such as Korea,
While the rule-based framework prevalent in USA and other countries focuses on single
trigger point, i.e., Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) for taking corrective
actions well in time, it is considered desirable to build a broader PCA regime in India so
as to delineate rule-based actions not only for shortfall in capital but also for other
indicators of deficiency so that a seamless paradigm for corrective actions can be put in
place for major deficiencies in banks’ functioning.  The schedule of corrective actions has
been worked out based on three parameters, i.e. CRAR, net non-performing assets (net
NPAs) and return on assets (ROA) which represent the three important parameters of
capital adequacy, asset quality and profitability.  Trigger points have been set under the
three parameters taking into the practicability of implementation of certain measures in
1
the Indian context.  These have also been discussed with select banks.
Indian Perspective
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic and Hong Kong.
These objectives 
time.
by or merger with healthier institutions.
standards
Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005. Centre, 
cgmicdbs@rbi.org.in rbidosby@vsnl.com
RBI Calls for SuggestionsThe recommended trigger points under CRAR are: CRAR less than 9 per cent but equal
or more than 6 per cent, CRAR less than 6 per cent but equal or more than 3 per cent and
CRAR less than 3 per cent.  Two trigger points have been proposed under net NPAs, viz.,
net NPAs over 10 per cent but less than 15 per cent and net NPAs of 15 per cent and
above.  The trigger on return on assets has been set at less than 0.25 per cent.
When a bank’s performance activates the trigger point, a certain set of mandatory actions
will follow.  The actions laid down will be directed against those areas of a bank’s
weakness, such as, inadequacy of capital funds vis-à-vis risk weighted assets, high level
of non-performing assets or a low level of operating income.  The mandatory actions are
in the nature of restriction on expansion of risk-weighted assets, submission and
implementation of capital restoration plan, prior approval of  the Reserve Bank for
opening of new branches and new lines of business, paying off costly deposits and
certificate of deposits, pruning of overheads, special drive to reduce the stock of NPAs,
review of loan policy, etc.
The framework also provides for certain discretionary actions.  These action points are
proposed to pre-empt any deterioration in the soundness of banks.  Any actions, without
duly recognising the diverse profile and factors contributing to the problems in banks,
however, may not achieve the desired effect.  The rationale for classifying the rule based
action points into mandatory and discretionary is that some of the actions are essential to
restore the financial health of banks, while other actions will be taken at the discretion of
Release : 2000-2001/160
2
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
the Reserve Bank depending upon the profile of each bank.
of
Mandatory and Discretionary Actions
Trigger Points