RBI Governor announces Monetary and
• Developments in macro-economic, monetary and price situations in 1999-
2000 were highly positive and 
• Credit Policy to support industrial growth with price stability.
• Sufficient liquidity to be made available for credit flow to support growth
• Fullfledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility to be introduced in stages.
• Wide-ranging Reforms towards widening and deepening financial markets
• 
• 
• 
• Minimum daily requirement of CRR balances reduced to 65 per cent.
• Minimum maturity of Certificates of Deposit reduced to 15 days
• Easing of procedures for FIs to raise resources, rationalisation of PLR norms,
FCNR(B) deposits.
• 
• 
Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, in a meeting with the Chief Executives
of banks today presented the annual Monetary and Credit Policy for 2000-2001.  In his
Statement, Governor reviewed the macro-economic conditions and spelt out that the
Reserve Bank proposes to continue the current stance of monetary policy and ensure that
all legitimate requirements for bank credit are met while guarding against any emergence
of inflationary pressures due to excess demand.  He also announced a number of policy
measures towards improving liquidity, wide-ranging measures for the development of
financial markets, in particular money and government securities markets, providing
operational flexibility to banks and institutions in interest rate policy, improving
2. Governor said that the GDP growth in 1999-2000 is likely to be 5.9 per cent as
compared with 6.8 per cent in 1998-99 and 5.0 per cent in 1997-98. A welcome feature of
macro-economic development last year was a substantial  acceleration in the growth of
industrial output, particularly manufacturing output.  The annual rate of inflation as
reflected in the movements in the  wholesale price index (1981-82=100) during the year
was 3.74 per cent (on a point-to-point basis) and was 2.97 per cent (on an average basis).
Dr.Bimal 
Governor said that inflation rates were significantly lower than in the preceding year.
Domestic Developments
prudential standards and credit delivery mechanisms.
Improvements in credit delivery mechanisms.
Moving towards best practices in prudential regulation and supervision.
Enhancement of limit for post-award clearance of export projects.
Liberalised Export Credit refinance facility.
Final guidelines for Banks’ entry into Insurance business issued.
including money market and government securities market.
through reduction in CRR if necessary.
favourable.
Highlights
Credit Policy for the year 2000-20012
3. Referring to monetary aggregates, Governor mentioned that during 1999-2000, the
annual growth in M , on a point to point basis, was 13.6 per cent (provisional) as against
3
19.2 per cent in 1998-99.  The aggregate deposits of the scheduled commercial banks
increased by 13.5 per cent as against 19.3 per cent in the previous year.  Non-food credit
showed an expansion of 16.0 per cent as against an increase of 13.0 per cent in the
previous year. The faster growth in bank credit to the commercial sector despite a lower
growth in deposits was facilitated by substantial reduction in cash reserve ratio (CRR) and
4. While indicating that there was a substantial increase in resources flowing to
mutual funds during 1999-2000 partly as a result of tax concessions, Governor added that
further growth and development of mutual funds, provided they are able to compete
without special concessions, could contribute to the development and stability of the
5. Governor pointed out that as a result of the fiscal deficit being higher at 5.6 per
cent of GDP as against budgeted figure of 4.0 per cent, gross market borrowings exceeded
the budgeted level by Rs. 15,616 crore for 1999-2000.  Thanks to favourable macro
economic environment, the Reserve Bank was able to meet the large market borrowing
requirements of government without without causing upward pressure on interest rates.
6. Governor mentioned that an important moneta ry development during the year has
been the  growth in the monetised deficit of the Government (i.e., net Reserve
Bank credit to Government), by as much as Rs.5 ,584 crore (a day before the final closing
of government accounts) and low growth of reserve money reflecting the success achieved
by Reserve Bank in activating its Open Market Operations (OMO).  Governor indicated
that if the reserve money growth and monetised deficit were of the same order in 1999-
2000 as in the previous year.  M expansion could have actually been even higher than last
year, which would have had an unfavourable effect on the inflationary outlook for the
7. Governor indicated that while RBI had been able to manage a large government
borrowing programme without undue strain on interest rates or the overall liquidity
environment, it was also clear that such high levels of fiscal deficits are not sustainable
over the medium term. Apart from causing substantial increase in interest payments, the
large  borrowing programmes of Government year after year have also put pressure on the
absorptive capacity of the market, holdings of government securities above the Statutory
Liquidity Ratio by banks amounting to about Rs.85,000 crore, which is higher than the
8. Governor urged that a national consensus on an effective and time bound
programme of fiscal correction is essential so that efforts made in this direction in the
9. Tracing developments in the external sector, Governor cited the sharp increase in
prices of crude oil and petroleum products impacting oil import bill by an estimated US $
12 billion.   After taking into account the recent changes in oil prices as well as changes in
EXIM policy, the current account deficit in the year 2000-2001 is still expected to be well
10. Developments in respect of the external sector as well as movements in foreign
exchange reserves were satisfactory. Foreign exchange reserves, including gold and SDR,
were at their highest (US $ 38.04 billion), and showed an increase of US $ 5.55 billion
during the course of the year. Net reserves, taking into account forward liabilities
increased by US $ 5.70 billion over the year.
below 2 per cent of GDP, due to turnaround in exports and buoyant invisible receipts.
External Developments
Union Budget for 2000-01 could be further intensified.
last year’s  net borrowings.
current year.
3
negative
financial system in the long run.
increase in non-deposit sources of funds.3
11. Governor mentioned that following the East-Asian crisis and subsequent
developments in certain other countries, it is widely recognised in the international fora ,
that in judging the adequacy of reserves in emerging economies, it is not enough to relate
the size of reserves to the quantum of merchandise imports or the size of the current
account deficit.  It has become increasingly important to take into account the composition
factor which has
to be built into this assessment is the need to take into account certain contingencies, such
as, unanticipated increase in commodity/asset prices. The recent international experience,
particularly during the period of the East Asian crisis, also highlighted the fact that the
emerging economies have to largely rely on their own resources during external
exigencies as there is no “lender of the last resort” to provide additional liquidity at short
12. The overall approach to the management of India’s foreign exchange reserves  has
reflected the changing composition of balance of payments, and has endeavoured to
reflect the “liquidity risks” associated with different types of flows and other
requirements. In emerging economies, unanticipated domestic or external developments,
including undue volatility in asset prices in equity/bond markets, can create
disproportionate pressures in the foreign exchange market. It is, therefore, essential to
continue with the pursuit of realistic and credible exchange rate policies, in addition to
vigorous implementation of domestic and external sector reforms  to further strengthen the
13. Exports, particularly software exports (which technically form part of the invisible
receipts in the balance of payments statistics) have done well during the year.  In the past
18 months, several measures were introduced to ensure timely delivery of credit to
exporters and remove procedural hassles.  In order to further improve the credit delivery
system, the Reserve Bank would now like to invite exporters, particularly those who are
14. Over the past two years, the Reserve Bank has also introduced several new
facilities for Non-resident Indians (NRIs).  The overall objective is to make financial
transactions in and out of India by NRIs as flexible and easy as possible, and to reduce the
need for seeking individual or specific permission from the Reserve Bank.  NRIs are also
requested to send in their responses on whether the facilities and procedures are working
15. Recently, the Government has substantially expanded the automatic route for
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).  RBI has already granted general permission to the
Indian companies to receive funds and issue shares to their foreign collaborators. In
January, 2000  general permission was granted to Indian companies for issue of ADRs and
GDRs without any value limits.  In addition, companies in IT & entertainment software
and certain other knowledge-based sectors have been granted further facilities for overseas
acquisition  without requiring prior permission of the Government or the Reserve Bank.  It
is hoped that these facilities would provide sufficient scope for expansion of
II. 
16. ernor mentioned that against the background of the developments in the
economy last year and economic prospects during 2000-2001, an important objective of
monetary policy in the current year is to provide sufficient credit for growth while
ensuring that there is no emergence of inflationary pressures  on this account.  On current
assessment, the prospects of achieving these objectives look reasonably promising. In line
with the continuing overall stance of policy, at the beginning of the new financial year on
April 1, 2000, the RBI announced a number of measures to enhance liquidity and reduce
Gov
Stance of Monetary Policy for 2000-2001
internationally competitive Indian enterprises at the global level.
satisfactorily.
located in non-metropolitan centres, to send their reactions.
balance of payments position over the medium term.
notice.
of capital flows, particularly short-term external liabilities.  An additional 4
the cost of funds to banks. Following these measures public sector banks have also
announced a reduction in their lending and deposit rates.
17. Governor mentioned t hat for purposes of monetary policy formulation on the basis
of current trends, growth in real GDP may be placed at 6.5 to 7.0 per cent in 2000-2001,
assuming a normal agricultural crop and continued improvement in industrial
performance.  Assuming the rate of inflation to be around 4.5 per cent, the projected
expansion in M for 2000-2001 is about 15.0 per cent.    Governor, however, stressed that
3
the above outlook can change in the event of unanticipated domestic or international
events. On the inflation front, in particular, there is need for continuous vigilance and
caution.  The Reserve Bank will continue to monitor domestic monetary and external
developments, and take necessary monetary action through the use of instruments at its
18. Based on the experience of some industrialised countries, there is a view that, in
India also, monetary policy, to be transparent and credible, should have an explicit
narrowly defined objective like an inflation mandate or target.  Governor mentioned that
while technically this appears to be a sound proposition, there are several constraints to its
adoption in the Indian context like fiscal dominance, the absence of fully integrated
financial markets which remain still imperfect and segmented and the high frequency data
requirements including those on a fully dependable inflation rate for targeting purposes
which are yet to be met. Under these circumstances, it is necessary to carefully measure
and balance between possible outcomes, after taking into account movements in a variety
19. While there has been a significant softening of interest rates in the last 13 months ,
Governor mentioned that there are several structural factors which constrain greater
flexibility in the interest rate structure in India.  Among some of these factors, which have
to be taken note of are : the post-tax return on contractual savings being still higher than
deposit rates, banks offering fixed rates gainst floating rates on deposits and higher
transaction costs. Governor mentioned that  while much greater flexibility in the structure
of interest rates in tune with changes in the inflationary environment is desirable,  there is
no “quick fix” solution to engineer a sharp fall in nominal deposit and lending rates of
banks. Vigorous action has to be taken by banks to reduce their transaction costs and the
volume of NPAs, and improve risk management.  This requires action on a number of
areas, including legal reforms for recovery of dues and restructuring of weak banks and
20. Governor reviewed ‘structural measures’ in the recent period introduced  to
strengthen the financial system and to improve the functioning of the various segments of
financial markets.  Governor mentioned that while there has been substantial progress in
achieving some of these objectives, for example, development of money market,
secondary market in government securities, deregulation and operational flexibility to
banks, etc., the pace of progress has been relatively slow and there is scope for
improvements in areas like retailing of government securities, risk management and
internal control systems and loan recovery and settlement procedures.  Governor added
that the financial reform initiated in recent years will be carried forward keeping in view
the actual experience in implementation and other relevant  developments. The following
Introduction of Liquidity Adjustment
Facility (LAF) replacing Interim Liquidity
Adjustment Facility (ILAF)
announcements were made in the policy:
Financial Sector Reforms and Monetary Policy Measures III. 
reduction in fiscal deficit.
of monetary and other indicators.
disposal, as necessary.5
21. Following the recommendation of an Internal Group, it has now been decided to
proceed with the implementation of a full-fledged LAF.  The new scheme will be
• In the first stage, with effect from June 5, 2000, the Additional CLF and level II
support to PDs will be replaced by  variable rate repo  auctions with same day
• In the second stage, the effective date for which will be decided in consultation
with banks and PDs, CLF and level I liquidity support will also be replaced by
• With full computerisation of PDO and introduction of RTGS expected to be in
place by the end of the current year, in the third stage, a collateralised LAF
through electronic transfers will be introduced.
• The proposed LAF is a more flexible scheme because the quantum of adjustment
as also the rates would be flexible, responding immediately to the needs of the
system..  There will be no change in the export credit refinance scheme which will
22. In an effort to carry forward the reforms towards w idening and deepening of the
financial markets, the following measures are being introduced for further development of
the markets :
(a
•  In order to provide more flexibility for pricing of rupee interest rate derivatives
and to facilitate some integration between money and foreign exchange markets,
the use of ‘interest rates implied in the foreign exchange forward market’ is
• 
• The facility to non-bank entities for routing transactions through PDs would be
upto end-December 2000.
• It is proposed to review and evolve a time bound programme of withdrawing
permission to non-bank entities for lending in the call/notice money market
repo market.
• It has been decided to modify the current guidelines for issue of CPs in
• The minimum daily requirement for maintaining CRR balances, is reduced from
85 per cent to 65 per cent.
• Consequent upon the delegation of powers by the Government to RBI, as part of
development of the repo market, State Government securities have been made
eligible for undertaking repos.  RBI has also widened the scope of participation in
the repo market to all the entities having SGL and Current Account with RBI,
Mumbai.
(b)  Government Securities Market
consultation with market participants.
coinciding with the development of 
further extended 
Minimum maturity for Certificates of Deposit is reduced to 15 days.
allowed as a benchmark.
)  Money Market
Development of Financial Markets
continue as before.
variable rate repo  auctions.
settlement.
introduced progressively in convenient stages in order to ensure smooth transition.6
• It is proposed to introduce a scheme for banks and primary dealers  providing for
automatic invocation of undrawn refinance/liquidity support from RBI for
facilitating smooth securities settlement.
• It has been decided to allow entities to sell the securities after they have been
allotted to them, in primary issues, thus enabling sale, settlement and transfer on
• In respect of both 14 day Treasury Bills, the day of payment has been changed
• A detailed review of liquidity support to PDs will be made and modifications will
PDs.
• Taking into account the principles for capital adequacy for market risk evolved by
regulatory bodies such as the International Organisation of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), fresh
guidelines for capital adequacy standards for PDs are being evolved, which will be
PDs.
(c
23. Action is being taken to set up a Debt Securities Clearing Corporation which will
inter alia pave the way for further opening up of the repo market to PSU bonds and bonds
demat form in depositories.
24. Detailed guidelines to banks for entry into insurance are issued.  Banks will be
required to obtain prior approval of RBI for entering into insurance area.  Banks having
minimum net worth of Rs.500 crore, and satisfying other criteria in regard to capital
adequacy, profitability, etc., will be allowed to undertake insurance business through joint
venture on risk participation basis.  RBI  will consider bank’s equity contribution in the
joint venture up to 50 per cent.  However, higher equity contribution by a promoter bank
may be allowed initially, on a highly selective basis, pending divestment of the equity in
excess of  50 per cent within the period prescribed under the amended insurance statutes.
Banks which do not satisfy the above criteria will be allowed on a ‘without risk
participation’ basis upto 10 per cent of their net worth or Rs.50 crore, whichever is lower,
. After consultation with banks, with the objective of  providing more operational
flexibility and eliminating rigidities, following measures are being introduced:
• Banks which have moved over to declaration of tenor-linked PLRs should indicate
• The restriction on fixed rate term loans being extended only for project loan is now
being withdrawn. Banks will henceforth have the freedom to offer all loans on
• anks at their discretion will have the option to choose the current swap rates
while offering FCNR (B) deposits enabling to refer to the swap rates quoted on
25
any online screen based information system.
B
fixed or floating rates complying with PLR stipulations.
PLRs is applicable. the specific tenor for which the declared 
Interest Rate Policy
as strategic investors.
Banks’ entry into Insurance Business
of Financial Institutions held in 
)  Debt Securities Clearing Corporation
finalised in consultation with 
be introduced in consultation with 
from Saturday to Monday or the next working day.
the same day.7
• Banks would be permitted as in the case of domestic term deposits to offer
26. Representations have b een received from some institutions that the manner in
which the export credit refinance limit is fixed under the existing  scheme precludes the
use of Export Bill Rediscounting Schemes by banks, which is of benefit to exporters.  It
has, therefore, been decided to liberalise the scheme  by introducing the following
• For the purpose of fixing refinance limits, the outstanding export credit (including
export bills rediscounted with institutions like EXIM Bank and refinance obtained
• Drawal of refinance will be on the basis of export credit eligible for refinance, i.e.,
after excluding export bills rediscounted with other banks/EXIM Bank and
27. It has  been decided that the above value limits for clearance for post-award
proposals for ADs should be raised from Rs.25 crore to Rs.50 crore  and that for 
crore to Rs.200 
28. Banks are being permitted to deploy the gold mobilised under the Gold Deposit
 
Mobilisation by all-India
• FIs are given flexibility in the matter of fixing interest rates on term deposits
without reference to SBI rates.
• Based on a review of regulatory experience, it has been decided to modify the
guidelines to FIs for raising resources by issuing bonds and other instruments
subject to overall limits.  A draft proposal will be circulated among the FIs, and
29.  A review by RBI of the action taken by banks shows that most of the banks are
well advanced in setting up a system for an appropriate assessment of risks associated
with different types of assets.  This process needs to be further accelerated.  In this
connection, an issue which has received some attention is the appropriate role of banks in
providing financial support to individuals as well as to corporates and market
intermediaries against the security of shares/debentures/bonds.  While RBI has already
issued some guidelines for advances against shares, etc., to individuals, stock brokers and
corporates , some  areas remain where there is need for removal of any ambiguities so
grey
(a)  Risk Management Systems in Banks
Prudential Measures
FIs. guidelines will be issued after further consultation with 
Institutions : Greater Flexibility Financial 
Resource 
it to other nominated banks. Scheme by lending
to Lend Gold to Other Nominated Banks
Gold Deposit Scheme - Allowing Banks
crore. Bank from Rs.100 
Exim
for Exports – Enhancement of Limit
Post-award Clearance of Project Proposals
The scheme will come into force effective fortnight beginning May 6, 2000.
refinance from NABARD/EXIM Bank,
from NABARD/EXIM Bank) will form the basis.
modification:
Liberalisation of Export Credit Refinance Facility
differential rates of interest on NRE /FCNR(B) deposits on size group basis.8
that policy of banks for supporting the development of capital markets is transparent and
known to all concerned, including investors.  In order to further develop the operating
guidelines for bank financing of equities, the Standing Technical Committee on Co-
ordination between RBI and SEBI is being requested to review the status and make
suitable recommendations, after appropriate consultations with banks and market
participants.
(b
30. On prudential considerations, banks are advised to voluntarily build-in the risk
weighted components of their subsidiaries into their own balance sheet on notional basis.
. The additional capital required may be provided in the bank’s books in phases beginning
from the year ending March 2001.
(c
31. In June 1999, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision had released a
consultative paper on 'A New Capital Adequacy Framework' which aims at further
strengthening the soundness and stability of the financial system and is designed to better
align regulatory capital with underlying risks faced by banks.   RBI has finalised and
forwarded its comments on the new Framework to the Basel Committee.  These
(d
32. The Reserve Bank has constituted in association with the Government of India a
‘Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes’ aiming at
identifying and monitoring developments in global standards and codes being evolved in
the context of the international developments and consider the applicability of these
standards and codes to Indian financial system, and chalk out a road map for aligning
India’s standards and practices with international best practices. The Standing
Committee has set up  non-official Advisory Groups in ten major subject areas with
(e
33. There is a growing acceptance that a Risk Based Supervision (RBS) approach
would be more efficient than the traditional transaction-based approach.  The Reserve
Bank would be engaging services of reputed  international consultants to draw on other
)  Non-Performing Advances (
34.  Banks will have to more aggressively pursue the recourse to Debt Recovery
Tribunals ( DRTs) as well as compromise settlement through the Settlement Advisory
Committees ( SACs) since the operation of SACs is scheduled to lapse on September 30,
2000.
(g
35. With a view to ensuring that non-SLR investments by banks are made on so
prudential considerations, with more transparency and guarding against potential risks,
draft guidelines for banks’ non-SLR investments have been evolved in consultation with
banks and financial institutions. Guidelines would be revised duly taking into account the
comments and suggestions 
from  banks,  financial institutions and others.
und
)  Banks’ non-SLR Investments
NPAs) of Banks (f
countries' experiences  in this regard.
)  Move towards Risk Based Supervision of Banks
outside eminent experts in concerned fields.
Financial Standards and Codes
)  Monitoring adherence to International
comments are available on the RBI’s web-site for generating wider discussion.
)  New Capital Adequacy Framework
)  Capital Adequacy Norms for Bank’s Subsidiaries9
36. Banks have been advised to provide credit on reasonable terms to certain sectors
like agriculture, micro-credit, etc., as per guidelines issued from time to time.  A number
of measures have been taken to improve credit delivery system for agriculture. Some parts
of the country have been affected by severe drought.  RBI has instructed its Regional
Offices to remain in close contact with the State Government authorities and local banks
and also for convening the meeting of  so that expeditious action is taken to
provide relief as per RBI guidelines, for conversion of short-term loans into medium-term
loans, rescheduling of loans, additional  loans, etc.  In addition, two measures
taken are: enhancement of ceiling from Rs.5 lakh to Rs.15 lakh, for classifying advances
for distribution  of inputs, as indirect advances to agriculture and also treating lending by
banks to NBFCs for 
37. Following the announcements made by the recent Union Budget in respect  of the
• The limit for dispensing with the collateral requirement for loans increased for the
tiny sector from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.5 
• 
increased from Rs.5 
• 
38. The State Bank of India has entered into an  with HDFC to set up a Credit
Information Bureau and the modalities for setting up of the Bureau in regard to ownership
and equity participation, management structure, security standards, rights and liabilities of
the Bureau, etc., are currently being worked out.
39. n pursuance of the recommendations of the Advisory Group on Reforms in
Deposit Insurance in India, a new law is required to be enacted and relevant proposals in
this respect will be forwarded in due course to the Government.
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
40. The NBFCs which have neither reported having attained the minimum NOF of
Rs.25 lakh nor sought extension of time from the RBI are not entitled to accept fresh
public deposits.  These NBFCs are advised to strictly adhere to the provisions of the
Statute, RBI regulations and continue to repay the matured deposits as per the contracted
terms.  RBI is keen to promote the concept of self regulatory  particularly for
smaller NBFCs; RBI also proposes to extend to the NBFCs the guidelines on Asset
Liability Management; RBI is also considering guidelines for NBFCs for their
entry/participation in insurance business and reviewing the regulatory structure and
41. The RBI released a ‘Discussion Paper’ (DP) in January 1999 on the issues relating
to Universal Banking for wider public debate.  The feedback on the discussion paper
indicated that while universal banking is desirable from the point of view of efficiency of
resource use, there is need for caution in moving towards such a system by banks and
Approach to Universal Banking
procedures for fixing of interest rates on deposits.
organisation
I
Deposit Insurance
MoU
specialised SSI bank branch.
branches to ensure that every district and SSI clusters are served by at least one
programme of SSI Public sector banks have been requested to accelerate their 
lakh. lakh to Rs.10 
To promote credit flow to small borrowers, the composite loan limit is being
lakh.
SSI sector, following action has been taken :
onlending to agriculture as indirect finance to agriculture.
needbased
SLBCs
Credit Delivery Mechanisms10
DFIs.  It is proposed to adopt the following broad approach for considering proposals in
(a) The principle of “Universal Banking” is a desirable goal. However, 
have certain special characteristics and as such any dilution of RBI’s prudential
 Though the DFIs would continue to have a special role in the Indian financial
system, any DFI, which wishes to do so, should have the option to transform
into bank (which it can exercise), provided the prudential norms as applicable
to banks are fully satisfied.  To this end, a DFI would need to prepare a
(c) The regulatory framework of RBI in respect of DFIs would need to be
High Power Committee on
42. The recommendations of the High Power Committee (HPC )  constituted in May
1999 are under consideration of RBI in consultation with Government.
Technology Upgradation
43. With the ultimate goal of  designing and developing a  multiple deferred/discrete
net settlement system and a Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), facilitating efficient
funds management, house-keeping and customer service, Reserve Bank has taken a
number of steps to improve the infrastructure.   The major items  in the Action Plan for
2000-2001are :
• The spread and coverage of the Indian Financial Network – INFINET will soon be
extended to cover all the hundred odd commercially important centres in the
• Priority will be given for integrating the various segments of the Payments and
Settlement system and on the introduction of the RTGS.
• Technology upgradation and increasing the scope of computerisation in  the
banking sector.
44. The experience in the last one year with Regulations Review Authority (RRA) for
reviewing Reserve Bank's rules, regulations and reporting systems  has been satisfactory
and the Reserve Bank has since extended the term of RRA for a further period of one year
from April 1, 2000.     Implementation of several suggestions not only paved the way for
streamlining several existing procedures and improving customer service, but also helped
in  reviewing and streamlining Bank’s reporting systems. A notable achievement of RRA
45. A Review of credit and monetary developments in the first half of the current year
will be undertaken in October 2000 confining to a review of monetary developments and
to such changes as may be necessary in monetary policy and projections for the second
transition path.
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
half of the year.
Mid-Term Review
the  compilation of Master circulars, subject-wise, in Manual form has been 
Regulations Review Authority
country.
Urban Co-operative Banks
strengthened.
(b)
and supervisory norms for conduct of banking business would be inadvisable.
banks
this area:11
Release : 1999-2000/1438
Press 