July 21, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers is the research journal of the Bank. It
contains contributions of the Bank’s Staff and reflects the views of the authors. The
Winter 1999 issue, which is released today, addresses the theme of revitalising growth,
with three Articles and two Special Notes woven around the theme. The Issue also
The first Article entitled “Estimating Optimal Growth for the Indian Economy: A
Dynamic Macroeconomic Model” by Sarat Chandra Dhal explores the concept of
optimum in the pursuit of economic growth. Economic theory suggests that there is a
unique growth path that also maintains the economy in a state of enduring 
balance. In a search for this optimal growth path for India, the Article uses disaggregated
information on the structural characteristics of the Indian economy from the input-output
accounts. It estimates the optimal growth path for India as lying between 6.5 to 7.5 per
cent and going up to 8 per cent with improvement in the productivity of capital. Shedding
more analytical light on the subject, two Special Notes entitled “Potential Output and
Output Gap: A Review” by   and Mriddul Saggar , and “Potential Growth
for the Indian Economy: Viable Alternatives to Time Series Approach” by Sarat 
 provide a menu of methodological approaches to estimating potential growth – a
growth path that is the maximum feasible, given the productive capacity of the economy
(optimal growth involves potential growth accompanied by sectoral balance). The first
note relies on the popular time series approach and estimates potential growth of the
Indian economy at 6.3 per cent, The second note employs alternatives to time series
approaches i.e., the ‘warranted growth’ approach and the ‘production function’ approach.
It estimates the potential growth at around 8-9 per cent that is consistent with
In real life, economic growth is characterised by fluctuations around the potential growth
path. An important component of these variations is the business cycle that produces
phases of expansion and recession in activity, particularly in capital intensive production
processes. For businesses and markets, it becomes vital to know if there is a business
cycle in operation and if so, the phase of the cycle through which the economy is passing.
The task before the policy maker is to stabilise fluctuations of activity around the chosen
growth path and thus minimise uncertainty and welfare losses. The second article in this
Issue entitled “Composite Index of Leading Indicators for Business Cycles in India” by
Om Prakash Mall detects the presence of the business cycle in India and dates the cycle,
identifying peaks and troughs as well as the duration of phases. The article shows that the
Index of Industrial Production (Manufacturing) is a leading indicator of the business
cycle in India with a two-quarter forecast lead. The article proposes a composite index of
leading indicators which efficiently predicts the turning points in the behaviour of the
Index of Industrial Production. Business expectation surveys would improve the
understanding of the business cycle and even yield more efficient leading indicators.
Fiscal policy is usually considered as the most potent policy instrument to achieve the
desired growth path. Typically, higher fiscal deficits are run by the government to step up
public expenditures that raise aggregate demand in the form of both consumption and
investment. This provides a stimulus for increased production. If the supply response is
adequate, growth accelerates in a stable manner; if it is not, the economy overheats.
Inflation makes the growth process unstable and short-lived. “Why Should the
Government be Indifferent to Inflation?” is the title of the third article in this Issue,
authored by Jeevan Khundrakpam, which joins the debate, particularly in India, on the
inflationary consequences of fiscal policy deployed in pursuit of growth. Testing the
argument under Indian conditions, the article finds that it would be unwise to trade
inflation for growth even for fiscal gains. More importantly, pursuit of desired rate of
growth at the desired rate of inflation may not yield the desired fiscal outcome.
Discretionary fiscal actions may be necessary. Eternal fiscal vigil is the price of stable
growth.
P. V. Sadanandan
Release : 2000-2001/108
Press 
. Manager Asstt
international perceptions about India.
Dhal
Chandra
Donde Kshitija
sectoral
contains three book reviews.
Winter 1999 Issue Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers: 