August 31, 2000
The Development Research Group (DRG) in the Reserve Bank of India has brought out a study
entitled “ Modernising Indian Agriculture: Priority Tasks and Critical Policies”. This is the twenty-
The study is authored by Prof. V. M.  and Dr P. D. 
The DRG Studies series have an accent on policy-oriented research.  They are released for wide
circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among professional economists and
policy makers on subjects of current interest.  The views expressed in these studies are those of the
In the post-Independence period, Indian agriculture has made significant progress in terms of
augmenting production to achieve self-sufficiency; however, concerns have been expressed about
the long-term sustainability of agricultural performance on account of the constraints posed by the
‘limits’ to availability of scarce resources, such as, land and water resources. While the policy
framework for the agricultural sector has been pervasive and interventionist, issues relating to
sustainability and modernisation of agriculture have not been adequately addressed. Moreover,
human skill formation, which is critical to a modern agricultural sector, has suffered relative
neglect. Against this background, the study identifies the following long-term priority objectives:
i) creating a self-regulatory system in the agricultural sector; ii) meeting the challenges of limits to
growth imposed by scarcity of land and water resources; and iii) promoting human development.
In pursuit of each objective, the study offers specific proposals to guide the design of the policy
regime for agriculture in the twenty-first century. They include evolving a national prospective for
agriculture compatible with market-led-growth, creating an environment which strengthens the
self-regulatory mechanisms for the sector, conservation and judicious use of critical endowments
from the grassroot upward;  level and diffusion of new skills and occupation for more balanced
The study also selects specific areas relating to agriculture in India for focused analysis- capital
formation, credit, insurance, globalisation, research and development, watershed development and
the non-farm sector. The study recommends, inter alia , capital formation out of re-direction of
fiscal subsidies; extending the outreach of formal financial institutions to small and marginal
farmers for the provision of credit; enhancing the coverage of agricultural insurance schemes to
cover the entire production process, including post-harvest, storage and processing, and private
participation in agricultural insurance;  agricultural export and import policies,
 of quantitative restrictions and building safety-nets to absorb external shocks.
Release : 2000-2001/328
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
http://www.rbi.org.in website The study is available on Reserve Bank of India 
tariffication
syncronising
spread of economic and social activities.
authors and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank.
Jeromi. Rao first in the DRG Study Series. 
Modernising Indian Agriculture: Priority Tasks and Critical Policies