The post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India with
Shri Yashwant Sinha, Union Finance Minister was held in New Delhi today.  Shri
The meeting was attended by Shri Piyush Mankad, Finance Secretary, 
Secretary (Economic Affairs), Shri Devi Dayal, Special Secretary (Banking) and Shri
J.S.Mathur, Additional Secretary (Budget).  Among the Board Members present were
Shri P.N.Dhar, Shri Y.H. Malegam, Shri J.J.Irani, Shri E.A. Reddy, 
Rao, Dr.Bhai Mohan Singh, Dr.Amrita Patel, Shri Vipin Malik and
Welcoming the Honorable Finance Minister Shri Yashwant Sinha and the
Honorable Minister of State for Banking, Insurance and Expenditure, Shri Vikhe 
the Governor said that this current post-budget meeting was taking place against the
background of very healthy and welcome developments in the economy in the current
year.  The hope expressed by the Reserve Bank's Board as well as the Minister at the last
year's post-budget meeting, that the year would witness an industrial recovery, has been
realised.  The annual growth rate of Inflation in the current year is at its lowest.  The
foreign exchange reserves are at the highest and were also rising despite the increase in
oil prices.  The Governor hoped that concerted action would be taken in the next few
that the measures taken in the Budget for 2000-2001 would further support accelerated
growth combined with price stability.  The abolition of tax on interest as well as certain
other measures taken towards flexibility in interest rates should also provide the
of credit reasonable.  Governor in particular, welcomed several steps announced in the
Budget such as, legislative measures encompassing monetary policy, banking and
Appreciating the role being played by the Reserve Bank, the Finance Minister
reiterated Government's policy to strengthen the autonomous status of the Central Bank.
He pointed out that the overall economic outlook is comfortable ,  through two problems
need mention, namely the uncertainty about the evolution of oil prices and the fiscal
deficit.  He referred to the demands on the budget due to defence and recommendations
of the Finance Commission, without which the deficit would have been lower.  He stated
that the Budget is intended to assist the growth process, in particular, in the rural
economy.  He also referred to the wide ranging proposals in the Budget relating to
financial sector reforms, not only for improving efficiency in the domestic economy, but
also for raising the international awareness of the efforts being made to strengthen the
financial sector.  In this context ,  he recalled the discussions in G-20 and other for a  on
international financial architecture on the international prudential standards.  He made a
mention of the problems relating to weak banks, ownership patterns in public sector
banks, transparency practices, non-performing assets and explained that the Budget has
addressed these issues.  He argued for gradually replacing the subsidies based system
with an investment based system.  Noting the impressive achievements in information
In his final remarks he asserted that the interest rate cut is an issue which falls
The discussions that followed related to areas such as subsidies, research and
development in agriculture, need for developing a common national market for
agriculture produce, marketing of specific rural projects and the need to strengthen the
non-banking finance companies and protect the interest of their depositors.
Bank's  domain. entirely in the Reserve 
technology sector, he stressed the need for developing both the old and the new economy.
finance.
necessary environment for keeping the overall liquidity situation comfortable and the cost
Against this background of developments in the current year, the Governor hoped
could  be brought down to a reasonable level. years, so that fiscal deficit 
Patil,
Governors of the Reserve Bank of India were also present.
Capoor, Deputy Jagdish Y.V.Reddy and Shri G.Ramachandran, Shri S.P.Talwar, Dr. Shri 
Dr.C.H.Hanumantha 
Dr.S.S.Johl,
Dr.E.A.S.Sarma,
Patil, Minister of State for Banking, Insurance and Expenditure was also present. B.Vikhe 
March 11, 2000
Finance Minister Meets RBI Central BoardRelease : 1999-2000/1230 Press 
General Manager
Alpana  Killawala