RBI releases ALM Guidelines for FIs
January 13, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India has today released the Guidelines on asset liability
management (ALM) system for the ten all-India term lending and refinancing institutions
(FIs) on its :  The comprehensive guidelines to these institutions
were issued on December 31, 1999 for instituting a structured asset liability management
(ALM) system by them. The guidelines will be effective from April 1, 2000.  FIs have
been advised to constitute an Asset Liability Committee (ALCO) headed by
CEO/CMD/DMD/ED on which the senior management of the FI from the concerned
department would need to be represented.
The purpose of the ALM guidelines is mainly to strengthen the Management
Information System within the FIs so as to sensitise them to the market risk assumed by
them.  Under the ALM Guidelines, the FIs are required to prepare periodical statements
on liquidity gap and interest rate sensitivity and put up to their top management.  
begin with, these statements are required to be compiled at quarterly intervals beginning
from April 1, 2000 but after the initial phase-in period of one year, the liquidity gap
report will be required to be prepared at fortnightly intervals and the interest rate
In the ALM systems prescribed for FIs, not only the items of assets and liabilities
appearing on the balance sheets of FIs are captured but also the cash flows emanating
from these items over the entire life of the asset, liability or contingent commitments.
While the Reserve Bank has prescribed prudential limits on negative liquidity gaps at 10
per cent and 15 per cent of the cash outflows in the first two time buckets (viz. ,1 to 14
days and 15 to 28 days), the FIs themselves have to evolve internal prudential limits for
cumulative negative liquidity gaps across all time buckets as also for the interest rate gaps
in various time buckets with the approval of their Board/ALCO.  The ALM system also
aims at capturing the foreign currency portfolio of the FIs and therefore, the FIs are also
required to compile currency-wise liquidity and interest rate sensitivity (IRS) reports in
respect of their foreign currency exposures - for which separate formats have been
prescribed.  For the time being, the FIs are not required to furnish the data to the Reserve
Bank about their liquidity gaps and interest rate gaps for which necessary prescriptions
:1999-2000/915
Press Release
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
will be made by the Reserve Bank separately in due course, after the system stabilises.
sensitivity statement at monthly intervals, with effective from April 1, 2001.
To
www.rbi.org.in website