The Information Technology applications in the banking and financial sector in India have
grown sharply in recent years.  IT can be leveraged to bring about significant improvements in a
number of areas including decision making, house keeping, customer service, payment flows,
,  in the banking and financial sector. To ensure the accrual of optimal benefits, necessary
human resources development measures and requisite steps to beef up security in IT use have to
prioritise the areas for the effective use of IT applications.
Further, there is also a need to map out the direction for the effective use of IT in the banking
The Reserve Bank of India has set up a Working Group on Priority Areas in Banking
Technology, consisting of experts, to prioritise major areas of emphasis, to be addressed by the
Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad in this
regard.  The IDRBT at Hyderabad has been set up by the Reserve Bank of India to undertake,
among other things, projects and activities that may be necessary for furtherance of the use of
 Identification of technology areas that impact customer service in the banking and
 
 Identification of educational programmes and their implementation to meet specialized
 To suggest measures generally to increase the use of electronic media for payment
4.3.2.1.5.4.3. 2.1.
services, thereby reducing the use of paper based instruments and cash.
demand for Information Technology experts in the banking and financial sector.
services.
with the ultimate objective of achieving improved house keeping, decision making and customer
Identification of research areas that could be of relevance to banking and financial sector
financial sector and generally improve payment flows.
The terms of reference are:
Banking Technology,
Institute for Development and Research in
Director,
Member-Secretary V.P.Gulati, Dr. 
Corporation Ltd.,
Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Andhra 
Chairman & Managing Director,
Member R.Chandrasekhar, Shri 
Global Trust Bank Ltd.,
Chairman and Managing Director,
Member Gelli, Ramesh Shri 
Softech Ltd., Goldstone M/s. 
Chairman,
Member Dr.K.K.K.Kutty,
Hyderabad, University of 
Vice Chancellor,
Chairman Rao P.Rama  Prof. 
is : The composition of the Working Group on Priority Areas in Banking Technology 
information technology in the banking and financial sectors.
and financial sector in the country.
be taken. Therefore, there is a need to 
etc.
March 31, 2000
in Banking Technology
RBI sets up Working Group on Priority Areas To suggest the necessary steps to improve security in IT use, and for this purpose,
undertake research with collaboration, if necessary, with other institutions/entities within the
The Working Group on Priority Areas in Banking Technology will submit its report to the
Chairman of the Governing Council, Institute for Development and Research in Banking
5.
Release : 1999-2000/1324 Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
)  by July 31, 2000. Technology (i.e., Governor of the Reserve Bank of India
country and outside the country.