June 2, 2000
The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 has come into effect on June 1, 2000 and has
replaced the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act 1973.  The object of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act 1973 was to conserve the foreign exchange resources; whereas the object of
the new Act, i.e., the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 is to facilitate external trade
and payments and to promote orderly maintenance of the foreign exchange market in India.
1. The new law is more transparent in its application.  It has laid down the areas where
specific permission of the Reserve Bank/Government of India is required.  In rest of the
cases no such permission would be needed and a person can remit funds and acquire
assets, incur liability in accordance with the specific provisions laid down in the Act or
notifications issued by the Reserve Bank/Government of India under the Act without
2. Application of FEMA may be seen broadly from two angles, viz., capital account
transactions and current account transactions.  Capital account transactions relate to
movement of capital, e.g., transactions in property and investments and lending and
borrowing money.  Transactions which do not fall in capital account category are current
account transactions which are permitted freely subject to a few restrictions as given in
3. a) Certain current account transactions would require RBI permission if they exceed a
b) A few current account transactions need permission of appropriate Government of
India authority irrespective of the amount.
c) There are seven types of current account transactions which are totally prohibited and
no transaction can, therefore, be undertaken relating to them.  These include transactions
Details of (a), (b) and (c) are given in schedules III, II and I of the Government of India
notification dated May 3, 2000. However, some of the ceilings pertaining to miscellaneous
(in US $)
Basic Travel Quota 3,000 5,000
1,000 5,000
1,000 5,000
2,500 5,000
3,000 5,000
Maintenance of close 5,000 5,000
Emigration
Employment
Donations
Gifts
Revised limits Earlier limits
Miscellaneous Remittances
remittances covered by (a) are given below for the information of the common citizens:
relating to lotteries, football pools, banned magazines and a few others.
certain ceiling.
the following paragraph.
seeking approval of the Reserve Bank/Government of India.
The highlights of the new Act are given below for the information of common citizens.
RBI issues Simple and Transparent Rules under FEMA4. Some other highlights of the new Act are :
• The Foreign Exchange Management Act and rules give full freedom to a person
resident in India who was earlier resident outside India to hold or own or
transfer any foreign security or immovable property situated outside India and
• Similar freedom is also given to a resident who inherits such security or
• A person resident outside India is permitted to hold shares, securities and
• A person resident outside India is also permitted to hold such properties
• The exchange drawn can also be used for purpose other than for which it is
drawal of exchange is otherwise permitted for such purpose.
• Certain prescribed limits have been substantially enhanced. For instance,
residents now going abroad for business purposes or for participating in
conferences/seminars will not need the Reserve Bank's permission to avail
foreign exchange up to US $ 25,000 per trip irrespective of the period of stay;
basic travel quota has been increased from the existing US$ 3,000 to US $ 5,000
• The Exchange Earners' Foreign Currency (EEFC) account holders and
Residents' Foreign Exchange (RFC) account holders are permitted to freely use
the funds held in EEFC/RFC accounts for payment of all permissible current
• The rules for foreign investment in India and Indian investment  abroad are also
comprehensive, transparent and permit Indian companies engaged in certain
specified sectors to acquire shares of foreign companies engaged in similar
activities by share swap or exchange through issue of ADRs/ GDRs up to certain
5. FEMA is a civil law unlike FERA. Contravention under FEMA will be dealt with
through civil procedures.  Unlike in FERA, the burden of proof under FEMA will be on the
enforcement agency and not on the implicated.  FEMA describes an elaborate 
machinery for total justice and fairness to the implicated while deciding on the question of
The Reserve Bank regulations under Foreign Exchange Management Act are
available on its website through its home page as also through a special URL:
For any queries regarding FEMA please approach the Exchange Control Department
in any of office of the Reserve Bank of India or email it to  or
contact FEMA Cell, Reserve Bank of India, Exchange Control Department, Central Office
Building, (10 Floor, Bhagat Singh Road, Fort, Mumbai-400 001).
Shahid 
th
rbiprd@giasbm01.vsnl.net.in
www.fema.rbi.org.in
contravention.
redressal
specified limits.
account transactions.
per calendar year.
drawn provided 
inherited from a person resident in India.
properties acquired by him while he/she was resident in India.
immovable property from a person resident outside India.
acquired when he/she was resident there.
relativeThe new Act repeals the old FERA. But any offence committed under the old Act
which is taken  of by a court within two years from repeal of FERA would be
dealt with under the provisions of the old Act.
We wish to make it clear that the above is a simple presentation of some of the
provisions of the new Act and should not be used or referred to for claiming any benefit
under the Act.
Release : 1999/2000/1621
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
cognisance