RBI keen to enlarge Forex Encashment Facilities in India
July 5, 2000
The Reserve Bank of India was keen to encourage enlargement of foreign exchange
encashment facilities in India and would look at removing regulatory constraints, if any, with
a positive outlook, stated Shri P.R. Gopala Rao, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India.
He was addressing a discussion session arranged by the Forum of Free Enterprises in
Giving a background to this initiative, Executive Director stated that the visitors to
this country, whether they come for business purposes or as tourists, should not face much
difficulties in encashing their travellers cheques.  The Reserve Bank of India has been for
some time now considering strengthening of the existing network of bank branches and
money-changers and is also not averse to encouraging setting up of different types of retail
outlets for encashment of traveller cheques and international credit cards in foreign currency.
It has also discussed the issue with banks, credit card issuers in India and those giving travel
related services with a view to encouraging them to seek alliances or implants for enlarging
 their   or make
payments or take Indian currency through international credit cards.  The Reserve Bank is
also considering giving more money-changing licences to those including medium size hotels
and departmental stores who could offer such services on a round-the-clock basis. The
Executive Director assured that if there were any regulatory constraints in setting up foreign
exchange bureaux, the Reserve Bank was willing to take a positive look at those constraints.
The Reserve Bank would welcome setting up of foreign exchange shops/ bureaux on the lines
Press Release No. 2000-2001/25
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
of STD/ISD booths to give the visitors a feeling of being welcome to India, he added.
cheques travellers encash the network through which visitors to India can easily 
The session was attended by company executives. Mumbai today. 