April 29, 2000
Constitution of a working group of State Finance Secretaries to explore the scope for
reducing the interest burden of states, including measures such as, debt prepayment and
recource to floating rate debt instruments was an important decision taken at the conference
Yet another significant decision was constitution of a task force on similar lines to
analyse and report on the extent of manouverability available in budget making at the state
level as also, scope for increasing budget flexibility. The Reserve Bank of India providing
Other important matters on which consensus was arrived at were:
(a) The Reserve Bank to further pursue with more state governments tapping of the market
through auction method for the state level borrowing  within the present
option of 5 to 35 per cent and also the possibility of enhancing the limit for such access
from the existing level of 35 per cent, to say, 50 per cent.
 The Reserve Bank to make technical analysis of multi-dimensional aspects of fiscal
(c) Constitution of core respondents among the State Finance Secretaries to help the
Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency (Dr. Ahluwalia Goup) finalise its views on the
(d) State Finance Secretaries to study the Reserve Bank’s technical approach paper on
legislation relating to fiscal responsibility in the light of ongoing exercises on the subject
(e) As requested by the State Finance Secretaries the Reserve Bank will make a study on the
changing nature of contingent liabilities, weights to be attached, manner of administration
 State Finance Secretaries also requested that the Reserve Bank to convene a meeting of
State Finance Secretaries and the credit rating agencies in which the rating agencies
would make a presentation of the methodology of rating state government guaranteed
bonds. The State Finance Secretaries suggested that the meeting should be held soon, in
view of the proposed use of such ratings for prudential purposes. The Reserve Bank
The Reserve Bank has been holding a conference of State Finance Secretaries from
time to time to facilitate exchange of views. Officials of the central government and Planning
Actions taken in the past few years by several states including better management of
their treasuries, legislative initiatives in imposing a ceiling on state government guarantees,
Commission are also invited to the conference.
agreed to hold the meeting.
(f)
of Guarantee Fund and circulate the report among state governments for their guidance;
in the Union Government and respond with suggestions;
level of the existing and the desirable fiscal transparency at the states level.
deficit in relation to the state domestic product and the debt burden of the states;
(b)
programme
technical and secretarial support to both the groups.
of the State Finance Secretaries held in the Reserve Bank of India today.
Conference of State Finance Secretariesbudget transparency, etc., are reflective of the usefulness of the interactions in these
Today’s conference also discussed aspects and issues relating to the auction system
for market borrowings by state governments and state government guarantees. The State
Finance Secretaries were apprised of the status on enactment of the proposed Government
Securities Act, progress of the work of the Committee on Voluntary Disclosure Norms and
Today’s conference had also the benefit of interacting with Dr Montek Singh
Ahluwalia, Member, Planning Commission & Chairman of the Advisory Group on Fiscal
Transparency set up by the Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes
(Chairman: Dr. Y V 
Press Release No: 1999-2000/1458
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
Reddy).
about constitution of Consolidated Sinking Fund.
conferences.