Market shows Interest in
July 7, 2000
Banks and travel-related finance companies are showing keen interest in setting up of
foreign exchange bureaux in the country for extending money changing facilities to
foreign visitors in a fast and convenient way.  Market participants, such as, Master Card,
American Express, Thomas Cook and Western Union who are in the business of
providing travel related services or money changing/money transfer facility, have already
shown such interest in their initial discussions with Shri P.R. Gopala Rao, Executive
The Reserve Bank of India is interested in the expansion of the existing network of 
branches of banks and money-changers. It also desires to encourage setting up of
different types of retail outlets for encashment of traveller cheques and international
credit cards in foreign currency.  The Reserve Bank had, in the recent past, discussed the
issue with banks, credit card issuers in India and those giving travel related services. 
Reserve Bank had indicated to them that it would encourage such companies to enlarge
their network through seeking alliances with existing banks/money changers or making
use of the space available with them so that the visitors to India can easily  their
  or make payments or receive Indian currency through international
credit cards.  The Reserve Bank had also indicated that it was considering giving more
money-changing licences to second tier hotels and departmental stores and other retail
shopping outlets that could offer such services on a quick and convenient basis. The
Reserve Bank had assured that if there were any regulatory constraints in setting up
foreign exchange bureaux, it would take a positive look at those constraints. The Reserve
Bank would welcome setting up of foreign exchange shops/ bureaux on the lines of
Release : 2000-2001/37
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
STD/ISD booths to give the visitors a feeling of being welcome to India.
cheques travellers
encash
The
forex
Director, Reserve Bank of India.
Foreign Exchange Bureau Business