US Treasury Secretary visits RBI
January 17, 2000
Mr. Lawrence H. Summers, Secretary of the Treasury of the United States of America, on
the first leg of his trip to India, visited the Reserve Bank of India along with the members
of a high-level US delegation in Mumbai today.  During his visit, Mr. Summers had a
meeting with Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India.  The meeting was
followed by a working lunch which was attended by the Deputy Governors of the
Reserve Bank of India and a cross-section of senior representatives of corporate sector
Welcoming Mr. Summers and the high-level delegation, Governor, Dr.  said
that the Reserve Bank was particularly happy about Mr. Summers' visit as, in addition to
his high official position as Secretary of the Treasury of the United States of America,
Mr. Summers was also one of the top economists in the world with deep interest in
Dr. Jalan then reviewed the current state of the Indian economy and the progress
made in financial sector reform. Pointing out that the macro economic situation was
extremely positive and the economy was on the upswing, Dr.  stated that the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) was expected to grow between 6 and 6.5 per cent with one of
the lowest inflation rates of less than 3 per cent in the current year. Capital markets were
buoyant.  India's foreign exchange reserves were very comfortable and had increased
substantially during the last couple of years despite the impact of East Asian crisis.
Reserves stood at over US $ 35 billion. India had continued to follow a prudent policy in
Dr. Jalan then touched upon India's position in respect of the ongoing
international discussions on the new financial architecture and related issues.  He said
that along with the US and other industrial countries, India was participating in
committees set up by international agencies, such as, the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank, and also the recently set up Committee of Governors and Finance
Ministers  of  20 industrialised and developing countries.  India had found these
discussions constructive and positive and hoped that as a result of these deliberations ,
necessary international arrangements to reduce the impact of volatility in capital flows on
developing countries would be worked out.  It was necessary that while formulating these
arrangements, the international community took into account the interest of 
Dr. emphasised the need for increasing the official capital flows particularly
for infrastructure and social sectors.  The preoccupation with monetary and financial
issues should not lead to neglect of 
Reviewing the developments in the financial sector, Dr. Jalan said that the Indian
financial sector was resilient and its vulnerability was less than other developing
countries because of the prudential and other norms being followed by Indian banks and
financial institutions. For instance, financial institutions and banks were not heavily
engaged in markets where asset prices were volatile, such as, real estate or stocks. India
was participating in the ongoing discussions in the Bank for International Settlements for
new capital adequacy and supervisory standards. India was already close to international
standards in most of these areas and these norms would be further strengthened as
Replying to the initial remarks of Dr. Jalan, Mr. Summers said that he is delighted
to be in India, and he thanked Dr. Jalan for his remarks and his hospitality.  Mr. Summers
noted that the U.S. relationship with India is taking on increased significance because of
necessary.
long term development issues.
Jalan 
market economies.
emerging
respect of external borrowings and the exchange markets were stable and comfortable.
Jalan
development issues.
Jalan
and representatives of banks and financial institutions located in Mumbai.the importance of building consensus between industrial and developing nations on how
to shape global integration.  He also noted India's economic potential and that India's
emergence will have a significant impact on global affairs during the next 5, 10 and 20
years.  Mr. Summers noted that the U.S. and India, as the world's largest and oldest
democracies, have an opportunity to work together to help shape the terms of the global
engagements in the years ahead.  By investing in a deeper and many-sided relationship,
the U.S. and India can better confront the strategic concerns that have been at the
The remarks of Dr. Jalan and Mr. Summers were followed by an informal exchange of
views between representatives of both sides on various aspects of Indian economy,
financial sector reforms and international developments by participants.
Release : 1999-2000/931
Press 
Manager
Rupambara Padhi
forefront of attention in recent years.