 
? ?  ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null???   ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null?  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
???? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? null? /Fax: 91 22 2266 0358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
      January 29, 2013 
Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13 - 
Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, a warm welcome to you all to this 
Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2012-13. 
2. Earlier this morning, we put out the Policy Review document. Based on an 
assessment of the current macroeconomic situation, we have decided to reduce the 
policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) by 25 basis points from 8.0 
per cent to 7.75 per cent. 
3. Consequent to this, the reverse repo rate under the LAF, determined with a 
spread of 100 basis points below the repo rate, gets calibrated to 6.75 per cent. 
Similarly, the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate, determined with a spread of 100 
basis points above the repo rate, and also the Bank Rate stand adjusted to 8.75 per 
cent.  
4. These changes have since come into effect immediately after the 
announcement.  
5. We have also decided to reduce the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled 
banks by 25 basis points from 4.25 per cent to 4.0 per cent of their net demand and 
time liabilities (NDTL) effective the fortnight beginning February 9, 2013.  
6. This reduction in the CRR will inject primary liquidity of around `180 billion into 
the banking system. 
Considerations Behind the Policy Move 
7. Today’s decision to further ease the monetary policy stance was informed by 
three considerations.   
8. First, both headline wholesale price inflation and its core component, non-food 
manufactured products inflation, have softened through the third quarter. This 
provided some relief from the persistence that dominated the first half of the year. 
Several indicators such as the weaker pricing power of corporates, excess capacity in 
some sectors, the possibility of international commodity prices stabilising as well as 
inflation momentum measures suggest that inflationary pressures have peaked. 
However, further moderation in inflation going into the next fiscal year is likely to be 
muted as the correction of under-pricing of administered items is still incomplete and 
food inflation remains elevated. Accordingly, the setting of monetary policy has to 
remain sensitive to these conflicting pressures and attendant risks. 
?nullnull???nullnullnull??2 
 
9. Second, growth has decelerated significantly below trend through the last fiscal 
year and through this year so far, and overall economic activity remains subdued. On 
the demand side, investment activity has been way below desired levels and 
consumption demand too has started to decelerate. External demand has also 
weakened due to languid global growth. On the supply side, constraints in the 
availability of key raw materials and intermediates are becoming binding. While the 
series of policy measures announced by the Government has boosted market 
sentiment, the investment outlook is still lacklustre, especially in terms of demand for 
new projects.  
10. The third consideration that informed our decision is that liquidity conditions 
have remained tight. Although the Reserve Bank lowered the cash reserve ratio, 
CRR, successively in September and October 2012, and carried out open market 
operations (OMO) injecting systemic liquidity of `470 billion during December and 
January to augment liquidity, the average net LAF borrowings at `910 billion in 
January have been above the Reserve Bank’s comfort level. This tightness could 
potentially hurt credit flow to productive sectors of the economy. The structural deficit 
in the system provided a strong case for injecting permanent primary liquidity into the 
system.   
Monetary Policy Stance 
11. The policy document also spells out  the three broad contours of our  monetary 
policy stance. These are: 
• first, to provide an appropriate interest rate environment to support 
growth as inflation risks moderate;  
• second, to contain inflation and anchor inflation expectations; and  
• third, to continue to manage liquidity to ensure adequate flow of credit to 
the productive sectors of the economy.  
Guidance 
12. As has become standard practice by now, we have also given the following 
guidance for the period forward:  
13. With headline inflation likely to have peaked and non-food manufactured 
products inflation declining steadily over the last few months, there is an increasing 
likelihood that going into 2013-14, inflation will remain range-bound around the current 
levels. This provides space, albeit limited, for monetary policy to give greater 
emphasis to growth risks. This policy guidance will, however, be conditioned by the 
evolving growth-inflation dynamic and the management of risks from the twin deficits.  
Expected Outcomes 
14. We expect that today’s policy actions, and the guidance that we have 
given, will result in the following three outcomes: 
• first, investment will be encouraged, thereby supporting growth;  
• second, medium-term inflation expectations will remain anchored on the 
basis of a credible commitment to low and stable inflation;  3 
 
• and, finally, there will be an improvement in liquidity conditions to 
support credit flow. 
Global and Domestic Developments 
15. Our policy decisions have been based on a detailed assessment of the global 
and domestic macroeconomic situation. Let me comment first on the global outlook.  
Global Economy  
16. Since the Reserve Bank’s last quarterly Policy Review in October 2012, 
headwinds holding back the global economy have begun to abate gradually, although 
sluggish conditions prevail. In the US, activity gathered momentum in the third quarter 
of 2012 but this is unlikely to have been sustained in the fourth quarter. While a 
political consensus to avert the ‘fiscal cliff’ has calmed financial markets, how the debt 
ceiling is managed will be crucial in shaping the market sentiment on the way forward. 
The euro area economy is threatened by continuing contraction, notwithstanding the 
liquidity firewall of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the EU’s commitment to act 
collectively to backstop the union. Overall, however, apprehensions that the sovereign 
debt crisis will disrupt the global financial system have ebbed.   
17. A pick-up in the pace of growth of China is likely. But growth in other emerging 
and developing economies has slowed owing to a combination of a slump in external 
demand and domestic structural bottlenecks. Furthermore, inflationary pressures 
persist in some of them. Overall, global economic prospects have improved modestly 
since the Reserve Bank’s last review in October 2012 even as significant risks remain. 
Indian Economy 
18. Moving on to the domestic economy, GDP growth slowed significantly this year, 
dropping to 5.5 per cent in the first quarter, and dropping even further to 5.3 per cent 
in the second quarter. The decline in the GDP growth rate became more broad based, 
with consumption demand also slowing alongside stalling investment and declining 
exports.  
19. In July 2012, the Reserve Bank projected GDP growth for the current year, 
2012-13, of 6.5 per cent. In the October Review, we revised this downwards to 5.8 per 
cent, signalling increasing global risks as well as accentuated domestic risks. As part 
of this review, we revisited this growth projection taking into account developments 
over the last three months. During this period, industrial activity has remained 
subdued. Sluggish external demand continues to inhibit improvement in services. 
While the coverage of rabi sowing has picked up, severe winter in certain parts of the 
country could affect crop prospects. New investment demand, which should be the 
key driver of an upturn, continues to be weak. While the series of recent policy 
initiatives by the Government has boosted market sentiment, it will take some time to 
reverse the investment slowdown and reinvigorate growth.  
20. Accordingly, we have revised downwards our baseline projection of GDP 
growth for the current year from 5.8 per cent to 5.5 per cent. 
 
 
 4 
 
Inflation 
21. Let me now turn to inflation. Headline WPI inflation eased significantly from 8.1 
per cent in September 2012 to 7.2 per cent by December. Notably, inflation on 
account of non-food manufactured products, which have a weight of 55 per cent in the 
WPI, fell sharply in November-December as input price pressures eased. The 
momentum indicators too suggest a moderation in headline as well as non-food 
manufactured products inflation. The Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey also 
points to a softening of the rate of increase of output prices, suggesting that the 
pricing power of corporates has weakened. Fuel group inflation moderated in 
December, mainly reflecting the tempering of inflation of non-administered petroleum 
products as well as the range-bound exchange rate of the rupee. 
22. Food inflation, on the other hand, showed a contrarian behaviour, moving into 
double digits in December, reflecting both cyclical and structural factors.  
23. In contrast to WPI inflation, CPI inflation as measured by the new consumer 
price index, rose to 10.6 per cent in December, largely reflecting the surge in food 
inflation. Excluding food and fuel groups, CPI inflation remained unchanged at 8.4 per 
cent during the third quarter. 
24. In the October Review, the Reserve Bank made a baseline projection of 
inflation for March 2013 of 7.5 per cent. An environment of slower growth and excess 
capacity in some sectors suggests that inflation has come off its peak. However, it is 
expected to be range-bound around the current levels due to persisting food inflation, 
the pass-through of diesel price adjustments over the next several months and the 
possibility of adjustment in other administered prices. If international commodity 
prices, including the price of crude, further decline, they should cushion the phased 
increase in diesel prices, to the extent they are not offset by exchange rate 
movements. A sustained reduction in inflation pressure is, however, contingent upon 
alleviation of supply constraints and progress on fiscal consolidation. This will also 
help mitigate the cost-push pressures stemming from the surge in wages.  
25. Keeping in view the expected moderation in non-food manufactured products 
inflation, domestic supply-demand balances and global trends in commodity prices, 
we revised downwards the baseline WPI inflation projection for March 2013 from 7.5 
per cent to 6.8 per cent. 
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
26. Let me now turn to monetary and liquidity conditions. Money supply remained 
below the indicative trajectory of the Reserve Bank. This essentially reflected the 
deceleration of growth in aggregate deposits and moderation in economic activity. On 
the other hand, the overall non-food credit growth was around the indicative trajectory. 
However, bank credit to industry showed a significant deceleration while credit to 
agriculture registered an increase.  
27. Keeping in view the seasonal pattern for the last quarter, M growth projection 
3  
for the current year has been scaled down to 13.0 per cent while non-food credit 
growth projection is retained at 16.0 per cent.  
 5 
 
28. Liquidity conditions tightened from the second week of November on account of 
a build-up in the Centre’s cash balances, festival-related lumpy increase in currency 
demand, and structural pressures brought on by the widening wedge between deposit 
growth and credit growth. Anticipating liquidity pressures, the Reserve Bank lowered 
the CRR and conducted open market operations. Despite these measures, the 
liquidity deficit in the system remained above the Reserve Bank’s comfort level. 
Risk Factors 
29. Macroeconomic management  going forward is subject to a number of risks. Let 
me briefly address them.  
• First, the widening of the current account deficit (CAD) to historically high 
levels, especially in the context of a large fiscal deficit and slowing growth, 
exposes the economy to the twin deficit risk.  Financing the CAD with 
increasingly risky and volatile flows increases the economy’s vulnerability to 
sudden shifts in risk appetite and liquidity preference, potentially threatening 
macroeconomic and exchange rate stability. Large fiscal deficits will accentuate 
the CAD risk, further crowd out private investment and stunt growth impulses.  
• Second, despite the recent calm, global risks remain elevated, with the 
potential for spillover into the Indian economy through trade, finance and 
confidence channels. In the US, the risk of political inaction to manage the debt 
ceiling or even a sudden onset of fiscal austerity can lead to a turmoil in 
financial markets, followed by a downturn in economic activity. Escalation of the 
euro area sovereign debt stress in view of the continuing absence of credible 
and comprehensive policy responses remains a contingent global risk. Risks 
also stem from geopolitical tensions that can adversely impact supplies and 
prices of key commodities, particularly of crude oil. Furthermore, these forces 
can potentially increase global risk aversion with implications for financing of 
our CAD.   
• Third, inflation over the last three years has been a result of demand pressures 
as well as supply constraints. With demand pressures now on the ebb, the 
supply constraints need to be urgently addressed. In the absence of an 
effective supply response, inflationary pressures may return and persist with 
adverse implications for macroeconomic stability.  
• Fourth, the key to stimulating growth is a vigorous and sustained revival in 
investment. Achieving this will, however, depend on a number of factors such 
as bridging the infrastructure gaps, and resolute pursuit of structural and 
governance reforms. 
• Finally, risk aversion in the banking system stemming from concerns relating to 
growing non-performing assets (NPAs) is constraining credit flow. 
Notwithstanding the importance of repairing asset quality, banks should be 
discerning in their loan decisions and ensure adequate credit flow to productive 
sectors of the economy. 
30. Let me conclude by summarising our macroeconomic concerns. Inflation has 
come off from its peak, but its further downward movement is going to be slow and 
gradual. On the other hand, economic activity has slowed, trailing well below its 
potential and opening up a negative output gap. What the economy needs most of all 
and most urgently is new investment. This will step up currently flagging aggregate 6 
 
demand and also ease the supply constraints so that existing capacity is fully utilised 
and new capacity is built up. A strong and effective supply response is particularly 
important for bridging the infrastructure gaps and correcting structural imbalances in 
other segments of the economy, including key food articles. Critical to this effort are a 
credible and comprehensive fiscal adjustment by the Government, implementation of 
structural reforms, hastening the approval process, and improving governance to 
inspire the trust and confidence of potential investors. The Reserve Bank, on its part, 
will have to calibrate monetary policy to the evolving growth-inflation dynamic and the 
management of the twin deficits risks. 
31. Thank you for your attention".  
 
         
         Ajit Prasad 
Press Release : 2012-2013/1267                               Assistant General Manager 
 