 
? ?  ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null???   ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null?  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
? ????? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? null? /Fax: 91 22 22660358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
        July 30, 2013 
First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2013-14  
 
Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, a warm welcome to you all. 
This morning, we put out the First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 
2013-14.Based on an assessment of the present and prospective macroeconomic 
situation, we have decided to keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment 
facility (LAF) as also the cash reserve ratio (CRR) unchanged.  
Accordingly, the repo rate stays at 7.25 per cent, the reverse repo rate at 6.25 
per cent, and the CRR at 4.0 per cent of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of 
scheduled banks. The marginal standing facility (MSF) rate used to have a mark up 
of a 100 basis points above the repo rate. You will recall that earlier this month we 
raised that mark up to 300 basis points, raising the MSF rate to 10.25 per cent. As 
there is no change in the repo rate, the MSF rate stays at 10.25 per cent.  
Considerations Behind the Policy Move 
The policy stance in this review was informed by two considerations. 
First, the need for continuous vigil and preparedness to pro-actively respond to 
risks to the economy from external developments, especially those stemming from 
global financial markets.  
Second, managing the trade-off posed by increased downside risks to growth 
and continuing risks to inflation and inflation expectations. 
Monetary Policy Stance 
Accordingly, the four broad contours of our monetary policy stance are the 
following: 
• first, to address the risks to macroeconomic stability from external shocks; 
• second, to continue to address the heightened risks to growth; 
• third, to guard against re-emergence of inflation pressures; and 
• fourth, to manage liquidity conditions to ensure adequate credit flow to the 
productive sectors of the economy. 
?nullnull???nullnullnull??2 
 
Guidance 
Let me now indicate the forward guidance that we have given. 
The monetary policy stance over the last two years has predominantly been 
shaped by the growth-inflation dynamic, even as external sector concerns have had a 
growing influence on policy calibration over the last one year. The current situation – 
moderating wholesale price inflation, prospects of softening of food inflation 
consequent on a robust monsoon, and decelerating growth – would have provided a 
reasonable case for continuing on the easing stance.  
However, India is currently caught in a classic ‘impossible trinity’ trilemma 
whereby we are having to forfeit some monetary policy discretion to address external 
sector concerns. The liquidity tightening measures instituted  by the Reserve Bank 
over the last two weeks are aimed at checking undue volatility in the foreign 
exchange market. They will be rolled back in a calibrated manner as stability is 
restored to the foreign exchange market, enabling monetary policy to revert to 
supporting growth with continuing vigil on inflation.   
We have emphasised that the time available now should be used with alacrity 
to institute structural measures to bring the current account deficit down to 
sustainable levels.  
The Reserve Bank stands ready to use all available instruments and 
measures at its command to respond proactively and swiftly to any adverse 
development. 
Global and Domestic Developments 
As always, our policy decision has been based on a detailed and careful 
assessment of the global and domestic macroeconomic situation. Let me begin with 
our assessment of the global outlook.  
Global Economy  
Global growth has been uneven and slower than initially expected. The tail 
risks to global recovery had eased in the early part of the year, but that improvement 
was overtaken by the flash turmoil in the financial markets because of the 
‘announcement effect’ of the tapering of quantitative easing (QE) by the US Fed.  
In advanced economies (AEs), activity has weakened. Emerging and 
developing economies (EDEs) are slowing, and are also experiencing sell-offs in their 
financial markets, largely due to the safe haven flight of capital. Market expectations 
of QE taper and the consequent increase in real interest rates in the US have 
translated into a rapid appreciation of the US dollar and consequent depreciation of 
EDE currencies.  
Commodity prices have generally softened, but the price of crude remains 
elevated.  
 
 
 3 
 
Indian Economy 
Here at home, economic activity weakened in the first quarter of this year. 
Lead indicators point to continuing headwinds facing manufacturing and services 
sector activity. 
Industrial production remained muted at 0.1 per cent during April-May; in May, 
there was an absolute decline of 1.6 per cent spread across all constituent sub-
sectors, barring electricity generation. Capital goods production continues to contract, 
reflecting deteriorating investment conditions. Fortunately, the monsoon arrived on 
time and rainfall to date has been above the long period average. Consequently, 
kharif sowing has been significantly higher than a year ago. 
In the May Policy, the Reserve Bank projected GDP growth for 2013-14 of 5.7 
per cent, conditional upon a normal monsoon returning agricultural growth to its trend 
level. The outlook for industrial activity, however, was expected to remain subdued. 
Growth in services and exports was expected to stay sluggish owing to global growth 
not improving significantly.  
While the onset of the monsoon and its spread have been robust, the 
persisting weakness in industrial activity has heightened the risks to growth. 
Moreover, global growth has been tepid, with consequent adverse spillovers on 
India’s exports, manufacturing and services.  
On the basis of the above considerations, the growth projection for the current 
year is revised downwards, from 5.7 per cent to 5.5 per cent. 
Inflation 
Let me now turn to inflation. Headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale 
price index (WPI), edged up slightly to 4.9 per cent in June after declining for five 
months on a clip. The pickup was mainly driven by a spurt in food inflation, especially 
in respect of vegetables and cereals.  
Fuel inflation declined due to the reduction in coal prices in March and easing 
of inflation in electricity prices because of base effects. Non-food manufactured 
products inflation fell to 2.0 per cent in June, the lowest since December 2009.   
Retail inflation, as measured by the new series of Consumer Price Index 
(CPI), had moderated somewhat during April-May, but it surged close to double digits 
in June, driven primarily by a sharp increase in food prices. 
In the May Policy, the Reserve Bank indicated that during the current year, 
WPI inflation will be range-bound around 5.5 per cent, with some edging down in the 
first half and some edging up in the second half, mainly on base effects. The inflation 
trajectory in the first quarter of this year has moved largely in line with these 
expectations. Keeping in view the domestic demand-supply balance, the outlook for 
global commodity prices and on the expectation that the spatial and temporal 
distribution of the monsoon during the rest of the season will be normal, the Reserve 
Bank will endeavour to condition the evolution of inflation to a level of 5.0 per cent by 
March 2014, using all instruments at its command.  
 4 
 
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
Let me now turn to monetary and liquidity conditions. 
Money supply (M ), at 12.8 per cent y-o-y on July 12, was close to the 
3
indicative trajectory of 13.0 per cent. On the other hand, non-food credit growth at 
14.3 per cent was lower than the indicative projection of 15.0 per cent, with the 
slowdown spread across all major sectors.  
With nominal growth remaining broadly at the same level as envisaged in the 
May Policy, monetary aggregates are expected to move along the projected  
trajectories. Accordingly, M growth projection for the current year has been retained 
3
at 13.0 per cent and aggregate deposit growth at 14.0 per cent. Non-food credit of 
scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) is projected to grow at 15.0 per cent. As 
always, these numbers are indicative projections and not targets. 
Liquidity conditions have eased considerably since the May Policy. The 
average daily net liquidity injection under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) 
declined to ` 828 billion in the first quarter of this year from ` 1,078 billion during the 
last quarter of 2012-13. Government balances have been in deficit since June 28 and 
have bolstered liquidity, thereby significantly reducing the demand for funds under 
the LAF. The net drawal from the LAF declined significantly during the first week of 
July. On July 26, the net drawal was ` 558 billion, including a drawal of ` 229 billion 
from the marginal standing facility (MSF). 
Risk Factors 
I have so far given you the Reserve Bank’s assessment of the global and 
domestic macroeconomic situation and our projections for the current year. Let me 
briefly indicate the risks to that  macroeconomic outlook. 
• First, the biggest risk to the macroeconomic outlook stems from the external 
sector. Financial markets around the world went into a flash turmoil beginning 
late May, on the perception of an earlier than expected tapering of its 
quantitative easing (QE) by the US Fed. The rupee depreciated in nominal 
terms by as much as 5.8 per cent between May 22 (the day of the first 
‘announcement effect’) and July 26, consequent on sudden stop and reversal 
of capital flows in reaction to the prospective change in the US monetary 
policy stance. It is not clear if financial markets have factored in the full impact 
of the prospective tapering of QE or whether they will react to every future 
announcement of tapering. We are dependent on external flows for financing 
our current account deficit. India will, therefore, remain vulnerable to 
confidence and sentiment in the global financial markets. 
• Second, we have been running a large current account deficit. The CAD has 
been well above the sustainable level of 2.5 per cent of GDP for three years in 
a row. This is a daunting structural risk factor. It has brought the external 
payments situation under increased stress, reflecting rising external 
indebtedness and the attendant burden of servicing external liabilities. Most 
external vulnerability indicators have deteriorated ,thereby eroding the 
economy’s resilience to shocks. The recent measures by the Reserve Bank to 
restore stability to the foreign exchange market should be used as a window of 
opportunity to put in place policies to bring CAD down to sustainable levels. 
Furthermore, the growing vulnerability in the external sector reinforces the 
importance of credible fiscal consolidation with accent on both the quantum 
and quality of adjustment. 5 
 
• Third, the investment climate remains weak and risk aversion continues to stall 
investment plans. The outlook for investment is inhibited by cost and time 
overruns, high leverage, deteriorating cash flows, erosion of asset quality and 
muted credit confidence. 
• Fourth, an environment of low and stable inflation and well-anchored inflation 
expectations is necessary to sustain growth in the medium-term. To engender 
this benign growth-inflation environment, it is critical to ease the supply 
constraints in the economy, particularly in the food and infrastructure sectors. 
Without policy efforts to address the deterioration in productivity and 
competitiveness, the pressures from wage increases and upward revisions in 
administered prices could weaken growth even further and exacerbate 
inflation pressures. 
Let me conclude by summarising our macroeconomic concerns. 
Risks to growth have increased notwithstanding the robust onset and spread 
of the monsoon. Industrial production has slumped, with lead indications of declining 
order books and input price pressures building on rupee depreciation. Meanwhile, 
depressed global conditions are undermining export performance, even as 
heightened volatility in capital flows has raised external funding risks. Wholesale 
price inflation pressures are on the ebb, but retail inflation remains high.  
Monetary policy going forward will be shaped by considerations of supporting 
growth, anchoring inflation expectations and maintaining external sector stability.  
The foreign exchange market came under severe stress starting May, 
prompting the Reserve Bank to institute liquidity tightening measures to contain the 
volatility. The recent measures by the Reserve Bank to restore stability to the foreign 
exchange market should be used as a window of opportunity to put in place policies 
to bring the CAD down to sustainable levels. 
Over the last one year, the Government has taken several policy initiatives to 
improve the investment environment. As these initiatives work through the system 
and are further built upon, the current slowdown can be reversed, returning the 
economy to a higher growth trajectory. The Reserve Bank will have to ensure that the 
economy traverses that high growth trajectory in an environment of price stability and 
financial stability. 
Thank you for your attention." 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2013-2014/205                   Principal Chief  General Manager 
 
 
 
 