 
? ? ? ?? ?  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? ?????? ?? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
????? ?????,  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ??? , ??. ??. ??. ?? ? , ? ? ?-400001 
? ?? ? ? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai-400001 
? ??/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? ?? ?/Fax: 91 22 22660358 ?- ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
           March 4, 2013 
Report on Currency and Finance 2009-12: Fiscal-Monetary Co-ordination 
The Reserve Bank of India released today its Report on Currency and 
Finance, 2009-12 on “Fiscal-Monetary Co-ordination”.  The Report on Currency and 
Finance, a staff research report, has focused on select themes since 1998-99.  
The theme for this Report assumes importance in the light of renewed focus 
on fiscal-monetary co-ordination across advanced economies and emerging market 
and developing economies (EMDEs) in the aftermath of global financial crisis. While 
the onset of the crisis saw close co-ordination between fiscal and monetary policies, 
both at the national and international levels, in the exit mode, individual countries 
have adopted different strategies to deal with their respective concerns of economic 
growth, inflation and financial stability.    
Regime shifts, culminating in the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management (FRBM) Act, have considerably enhanced the degrees of freedom for 
monetary policy setting in India. However, fiscal dominance of monetary policy still 
remains as a result of large fiscal deficits, suppressed inflation and debt dynamics 
that feed into reserve money. At times, de facto monetisation of deficit occurs, as 
large open market operations are needed to preserve liquidity and monetary 
conditions as well as orderly conditions in the debt markets. This has inflationary 
consequences. The Indian experience suggests that fiscal rules, although necessary, 
are not sufficient in optimising the outcomes of fiscal-monetary co-ordination. The 
regime of fiscal rules could be improved by (i) focusing on structural deficits; (ii) 
removing ambiguity about any exceptions to be made by including expenditure rules 
to deficit rules; and (iii) adopting broader definitions of both deficit and debt to cover 
quasi-fiscal activities. On the issue of institutional arrangements for government cash 
and debt management, the post crisis international experience underscores the need 
for closer co-ordination between monetary and debt managers and fiscal authorities. 
Given that government borrowing continues to be large in India and the general 
economic environment warrants a close monitoring of the evolving fiscal situation, 
persisting with the central bank’s engagement with government debt management 
coupled with more intensive co-ordination with the government appears to be the 
appropriate approach for the medium term. 
Highlights  
? Until the early 1980s, monetary policy was generally subservient to fiscal 
policy, with the central banks’ financing of government deficits often 
introducing an inflationary bias. 
? During the 1990s, with the spread of rule-based fiscal policies and the 
adoption of inflation targeting by central banks across many countries 
including those in the emerging markets, fiscal-monetary coordination showed 
????? ??????????????2 
 
signs of progressive improvement with a gradual shift towards market-based 
monetary and debt management practices. 
? The global financial crisis of 2007-09 and the euro zone crisis of 2010 to the 
present, marks a new phase in fiscal-monetary co-ordination. On the one 
hand, the adoption of unconventional measures and expansion of balance 
sheets through purchases of long-term dated securities and unimpaired loans 
by central banks blurred the distinction between fiscal and monetary policies. 
On the other hand, bailouts by governments and the nationalisation of troubled 
financial institutions blurred the boundaries between fiscal and financial 
policies.  
? In India, fiscal dominance of monetary policy has moderated over the past two 
decades, but not waned. The two supplemental agreements between the 
Reserve Bank and the government during the 1990s first curbed and then 
removed automatic monetisation through phasing out the system of ad hoc 
treasury bills. The FRBM Act, 2003 ushered in a regime of fiscal rules with the 
objective of lowering the size of the fiscal deficits and restraining debt. The Act 
also prohibited the Reserve Bank from subscribing to primary issuances of the 
government securities, thus putting an end to direct monetisation. 
? Notwithstanding these gains, newer challenges have emerged that include     
(i) pressures on monetary policy arising from large market borrowings to fund 
high fiscal deficits that, at times, lead to de facto monetisation of deficit,         
(ii) inflationary potential of large fiscal deficits, (iii) pro-cyclicality of government 
spending and (iv) deficit-debt dynamics that poses the risk of crowding out 
private investment.   
? The size and composition of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet has evolved in 
line with the changing institutional arrangements of fiscal-monetary co-
ordination in India. In the post-fiscal reforms period, monetary policy and 
hence, the central bank balance sheet has been generally freed from 
straitjacket of fiscal deficit. The introduction of the market stabilisation scheme, 
under which government securities were issued to sterilise the large capital 
flows witnessed in the 2000s, was an important milestone in the interface 
between the fiscal and monetary authorities, with the fisc also sharing the cost 
of sterilisation.  
? During the crisis year 2008-09, the Reserve Bank's balance sheet shrank in 
size, unlike the expansion witnessed by the central banks of several advanced 
economies. The Reserve Bank’s balance sheet has expanded significantly 
since then reflecting its liquidity management operations, aimed at 
strengthening the recovery process while containing inflation.      
? The fiscal-monetary coordination during 2008-09 and 2009-10 met with 
considerable success in reviving growth and maintaining financial market 
stability. Developments in the more recent period, when both fiscal deficit and 
inflation remained high and investment and growth slackened, also reflected 
the imperative of co-ordinated policy actions. 
? An empirical exercise indicates that fiscal deficit tends to exert upward 
pressure on the call rate (which is used as a proxy for the monetary policy 
rate) after a lag, even after controlling for the output gap and the inflation gap. 
This underscores the need for greater co-ordination of fiscal and monetary 
policies in order to attain the overarching objectives of growth, price stability 
and financial stability.   3 
 
 
? In India, even as the long record of debt management conducted by the 
central bank has been impressive, the successful staving off of the indirect 
adverse effects of the global financial crisis in the recent period, has been 
attributed to the close co-ordination between debt, liquidity/ monetary and 
exchange rate management. The processes in this regard were greatly 
facilitated because these functions, although separate, remained housed 
within the same organisation. 
? In the aftermath of the global financial and the euro zone sovereign debt 
crises, a substantial body of opinion has favoured widening of the mandate of 
central banking beyond price stability to encompass financial stability and 
sovereign debt sustainability, keeping in view the close inter-linkages between 
the three objectives. This has caused a rethink on the institutional 
arrangements for debt management in India, going forward. 
Lessons and Future Challenges 
? Some valuable lessons for fiscal-monetary co-ordination have emerged from 
the recent crisis. The crisis highlighted the inadequacy of macroeconomic 
stability in ensuring financial stability. Financial stability has, therefore, 
emerged as a separate policy objective besides growth and price stability for 
central banks.  
? Among the prominent post-crisis challenges is the need to insulate the 
financial sector from negative feedback from sovereign debt related concerns 
as also to minimise the fiscal burden on monetary policy. With the inability of 
governments to stabilise debt levels or even finance deficits at reasonable 
interest rates, monetary policy is confronting a new phase of fiscal dominance. 
Therefore, credible fiscal consolidation plans and co-ordination strategies 
need to be designed to ensure an appropriate fiscal-monetary mix that is 
consistent with growth, inflation and financial stability.  
? The Indian experience suggests that fiscal rules, although necessary, are not 
sufficient in optimising the outcomes of fiscal-monetary co-ordination. There is 
a need for an improved regime of fiscal rules with a focus on structural deficits. 
The rules could be made flexible to allow adjustment for cyclical factors while 
ensuring that the embedded flexibility in fiscal rules does not lead to fiscal 
imprudence in the name of cyclical considerations. Going forward, there is a 
need to remove ambiguity about any exceptions to be made, by adding 
expenditure rules to deficit rules and by adopting broader definitions of both 
deficit and debt to cover quasi-fiscal activities.    
? Effective fiscal-monetary coordination in managing sterilisation issues during 
the high capital flow regime of early the 2000s and liquidity problems during 
the crisis period have had a significant impact on the Reserve Bank’s balance 
sheet. Going forward, such fiscal-monetary co-operation in a framework where 
central bank autonomy is not compromised is desirable, particularly in 
increasing the strength and credibility of the central bank balance sheet. 
? In light of the increasing valuation and systemic risks in today’s market 
oriented and globalised environment, there is a need to further strengthen the 
balance sheet of the Reserve Bank. 
? With inflation now showing signs of moderation and the output gap remaining 
negative, the need to stimulate investment as a means to revert to the trend 
rate of growth of the economy, is indeed pressing. The revival of investment 4 
 
activity depends on various structural factors as well as interest rates. In this 
context, an orderly and qualitative fiscal adjustment process would not only 
facilitate the attainment of the Twelfth Plan growth objective but also provide 
more headroom to monetary policy to address macroeconomic and financial 
stability objectives, in general, and the growth objective, in particular.  
? Keeping in view the emerging economic situation and the lessons of the global 
financial crisis, the institutional arrangements for government debt 
management in India over the medium term would require the continued 
involvement of the central bank coupled with more intensive co-ordination with 
the government. 
? Careful calibration towards reverting to fiscal consolidation and proper 
assessment of any likely institutional changes in public debt management 
constitute key imperatives for the outlook of fiscal-monetary debt management 
co-ordination in India. 
? The persistence of very large borrowings by the government has significant 
macroeconomic, monetary and financial stability implications – areas where 
the central bank has an undeniably important, if not unique, role to play. The 
debt management of all the state governments casts an added and distinct 
dimension to the issue. Against this backdrop, there is a need to review the 
content and pace of the proposed shift of the debt management function from 
the central bank to the government. 
Chapter Scheme  
The Report is organised in six chapters. After setting forth the rationale for the 
theme of the Report in Chapter 1, Chapter 2 “Fiscal-Monetary Co-ordination: Theory 
and International Experience” deals with theoretical underpinnings and cross-country 
experience with regard to fiscal-monetary coordination. Chapter 3 “Fiscal-Monetary 
Co-ordination in India: An Assessment” presents the Indian experience in this regard, 
noting that fiscal dominance of monetary policy has moderated over the past two 
decades, though large fiscal deficits, suppressed inflation and debt dynamics 
continue to feed into reserve money. Chapter 4 “Fiscal Operations and the Reserve 
Bank’s Balance Sheet”  traces the substantial transformation in the Reserve Bank’s 
balance sheet over the years in line with the shifts in the regimes of monetary policy 
operations and different phases of fiscal-monetary co-ordination. Chapter 5 “Fiscal-
Monetary Policy Co-ordination and Institutional Arrangements for Government Debt 
and Cash Management: A Medium-term Outlook” examines the outlook for fiscal-
monetary-debt management co-ordination in India, particularly in the context of the 
post-crisis return to the prescribed fiscal roadmap and the renewed thinking on the 
institutional arrangements for debt management, against the backdrop of the global 
financial crisis. The concluding Chapter “Lessons and Future Challenges” identifies a 
few key lessons and future challenges for fiscal-monetary coordination internationally 
as well as in India in the light of recent experience. 
DISCLAIMER 
"The findings, views, and conclusions expressed in this Report are entirely 
those of the contributing staff of the Department of Economic and Policy Research 
(DEPR) and should not necessarily be interpreted as the official views of the Reserve 
Bank of India." 
       
         R. R. Sinha 
Press Release : 2012-2013/1476                     Deputy General Manager 
         