 
? ? ? ?? ?  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? ?????? ?? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
????? ?????,  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ??? , ??. ??. ??. ?? ? , ? ? ?-400001 
? ?? ? ? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai-400001 
? ??/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? ?? ?/Fax: 91 22 22660358 ?- ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
May 3, 2013 
Monetary Policy Statement for 2013-14 
Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, a hearty welcome to you all to this 
dissemination of the Monetary Policy Statement for 2013-14, which we put out a 
short while ago. 
2. Based on an assessment of the current and prospective macroeconomic 
situation, we have decided to reduce the policy repo rate under the liquidity 
adjustment facility (LAF) by 25 basis points from 7.5 per cent to 7.25 per cent. 
3. Consequently, the reverse repo rate under the LAF, determined with a spread 
of 100 basis points below the repo rate, gets calibrated to 6.25 per cent. Similarly, the 
marginal standing facility (MSF) rate, determined with a spread of 100 basis points 
above the repo rate, and also the Bank Rate, stand adjusted to 8.25 per cent.  
4. These changes have come into effect immediately after the announcement.  
Considerations Behind the Policy Move 
5. Today’s decision to further ease the monetary policy stance was informed by 
two considerations.   
6. First, growth has decelerated continuously and steeply, more than halving 
from 9.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of year before last, 2010-11, to 4.5 per cent in 
the third quarter of last year, 2012-13. The Reserve Bank’s current assessment is 
that activity will remain subdued during the first half of this year with a modest pick-up 
in the second half, subject to appropriate conditions ensuing. 
7. The second consideration that went into the policy decision was the inflation 
outlook. Although headline WPI inflation had eased by March 2013 and came close 
to the Reserve Bank’s tolerance threshold, it is important to note that food price 
pressures persist, and supply constraints are endemic. These could lead to 
generalisation of inflation and strains on the balance of payments.  
Monetary Policy Stance 
8. The policy document also spells out  the three broad contours of our  
monetary policy stance. These are: 
? first, to continue to address the accentuated risks to growth; 
? second, to guard against the risks of inflation pressures re-emerging and 
adversely impacting inflation expectations, even as corrections in administered 
prices release suppressed inflation; and 
? third, to appropriately manage liquidity to ensure adequate credit flow to the 
productive sectors of the economy 
????? ??????????????2 
 
 
Guidance 
9. As per standard practice, we have also given the following guidance for the 
period forward:  
10. Today’s decision to further cut the repo rate carries forward the measures put 
in place since January last year towards supporting growth in the face of gradual 
moderation of headline inflation. Nevertheless, it is important to note that recent 
monetary policy action, by itself, cannot revive growth. It needs to be supplemented 
by efforts towards easing the supply bottlenecks, improving governance and stepping 
up public investment, alongside continuing commitment to fiscal consolidation.  
11. Upside risks to inflation in the near term are still significant in view of sectoral 
demand supply imbalances, the ongoing correction in administered prices and 
pressures stemming from increases in minimum support prices. In view of this, 
monetary policy cannot afford to lower its guard against the possibility of resurgence 
of inflation pressures. Monetary policy will also have to remain alert to the risks on 
account of the current account deficit (CAD) and its financing, which could warrant a 
swift reversal of the policy stance.   
12. Overall, the balance of risks stemming from the Reserve Bank’s assessment 
of the growth-inflation dynamic yields little space for further monetary easing. The 
Reserve Bank will endeavour to actively manage liquidity to reinforce monetary 
transmission, consistent with the growth-inflation balance. 
Global and Domestic Developments 
13. Our policy decisions have been based on a detailed assessment of the global 
and domestic macroeconomic situation. Let me comment first on the global outlook.  
Global Economy  
14. Since the Reserve Bank’s last quarter Review in January 2013, near-term 
risks in the advanced economies (AEs) have receded. This improvement, however, is 
yet to fully transmit to economic activity which remains sluggish. Risks in policy 
implementation and uncertainty about outcomes continue to threaten the prospects of 
a sustained recovery in advanced economies.  
15. Emerging and developing economies (EDEs) are in the process of a multi-
speed recovery. However, weak external demand and domestic bottlenecks continue 
to restrain investment in some of the major emerging economies. Inflation risks in 
EDEs appear contained, reflecting negative output gaps and the recent softening of 
international crude and food prices. 
Indian Economy 
16. Moving on to the domestic economy, with output expansion of only 4.5 per 
cent in third quarter of last year, the lowest in 15 quarters, cumulative GDP growth for 
the period April-December 2012 declined to 5.0 per cent, down from 6.6 per cent a 
year ago.  This was mainly due to the protracted weakness in industrial activity 
aggravated by domestic supply bottlenecks, and slowdown in the services sector 
reflecting weak external demand.  
17. The Central Statistics Office (CSO) put out the advance estimate of GDP 
growth for last year, 2012-13, of 5.0 per cent, lower than the Reserve Bank’s January 
2013 baseline projection of 5.5 per cent. The CSO’s lower estimate reflects slower 
than expected growth in both industry and services. 3 
 
18. Looking ahead, economic activity during the current year is expected to show 
only a modest improvement over last year, with a pick-up likely only in the second 
half of the year. Agricultural growth could return to trend levels if the monsoon is 
normal as recently forecast. The outlook for industrial activity remains subdued 
because the pipeline of new investment has dried up and existing projects remain 
stalled by bottlenecks and implementation gaps. Growth in services and exports may 
remain sluggish too, given that global growth is unlikely to improve significantly from 
2012. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank’s baseline projection of GDP growth for 2013-
14 is 5.7 per cent. 
Inflation 
19. Let me now turn to inflation. Headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale 
price index (WPI), moderated to an average of 7.3 per cent last year from 8.9 per 
cent in the year before. The easing was particularly significant in the fourth quarter of 
last year. We ended the year with WPI inflation of 6.0 per cent in March 2013, the 
lowest in the last three years.   
20. Even as headline inflation eased, there were upside pressures on food 
inflation through the year owing to an unusual spike in vegetable prices early in the 
year followed by rise in cereal prices.  
21. Fuel inflation averaged in double digits during 2012-13, largely reflecting 
upward revisions in administered prices and the pass through of high international 
crude prices to freely priced items.  
22. Non-food manufactured products inflation ruled above the comfort level in the 
first half of 2012-13 but declined in the second half, reflecting easing of input price 
pressures and erosion of pricing power.  
23. Even as WPI inflation eased, retail inflation, as measured by the new 
consumer price index, averaged 10.2 per cent during 2012-13, largely driven by food 
inflation. Even after excluding food and fuel groups, CPI inflation remained sticky, 
averaging 8.7 per cent.  
24. In the Reserve Bank’s assessment, WPI inflation is expected to be range-
bound around 5.5 per cent during 2013-14. This assessment factors in the domestic 
demand-supply balance, the outlook for global commodity prices and the forecast of 
a normal monsoon. 
25. It is critical to consolidate and build on the recent gains in containing inflation. 
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank will endeavour to condition the evolution of inflation to 
a level of 5.0 per cent by March 2014.  
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
26. Let me now turn to monetary and liquidity conditions.  
27. Consistent with the growth projections and the Reserve Bank’s inflation 
tolerance threshold, M growth for 2013-14 is projected at 13.0 per cent for policy 
3
purposes. Consequently, aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) 
are projected to grow by 14.0 per cent. Keeping in view the resource requirements of 
the private sector, the growth in non-food credit of SCBs is projected at 15.0 per cent. 
We would be guided by the evolution of monetary aggregates along these indicative 
trajectories in the conduct of monetary policy.  
28. Liquidity remained under pressure throughout last year because of two 
factors – first, persistently high government cash balances with the Reserve Bank, 
and second, elevated incremental credit to deposit ratio for much of the year. In order 
to alleviate liquidity pressures, last year, the Reserve Bank lowered the cash reserve 4 
 
ratio (CRR) cumulatively by 75 bps on three occasions and the statutory liquidity ratio 
(SLR) by 100 bps.  In addition, the Reserve Bank injected liquidity to the tune of `1.5 
trillion through open market operations (OMO). The net injection of liquidity under the 
LAF peaked at `1.8 trillion on March 28, 2013 reflecting the year-end demand. 
However, it reversed sharply to `800 billion by end-April 2013. 
29. The Reserve Bank will endeavour to actively and appropriately manage 
liquidity to ensure adequate credit flow to the productive sectors of the economy and 
to reinforce monetary transmission consistent with the growth-inflation balance. 
Risk Factors 
30. The macroeconomic outlook for this year, as set out in the Policy Statement, is 
subject to a number of risks. Let me briefly address them.  
? First, the biggest risk to the economy stems from the CAD which, last year, 
was historically the highest, and well above the sustainable level of 2.5 per 
cent of GDP as estimated by the Reserve Bank. A large CAD, appreciably 
above the sustainable level year after year, will put pressure on servicing of 
external liabilities.  
? Second, even as the large CAD is a risk by itself, its financing exposes the 
economy to the risk of sudden stop and reversal of capital flows should global 
liquidity rapidly tighten. The global liquidity situation could quickly alter for 
EDEs, including India, for two reasons. First, the outlook for AEs remains 
uncertain, and even if there may be no event shocks, there could well be 
process shocks which could result in capital outflows from EDEs. Second, with 
quantitative easing (QE), AE central banks are in uncharted territory with 
considerable uncertainty about the trajectory of recovery and the calibration of 
QE. 
? The third risk factor is that a sustained revival of growth is not possible without 
a revival of investment. But investment sentiment remains inhibited owing to 
subdued business confidence and dented business profitability. Both 
borrowers and lenders have become risk averse. Borrowers have become risk 
averse because of governance concerns, delays in approvals and tighter 
credit conditions. For lenders, risk aversion stems from the erosion of asset 
quality, deteriorating cash flow situation of borrowers eroding their credit 
worthiness and heightened risk premiums.   
? And finally, the effectiveness of monetary policy in bringing down inflation 
pressures and anchoring inflation expectations could be undermined by supply 
constraints in the economy, particularly in the food and infrastructure sectors. 
Without policy efforts to unlock the tightening supply constraints and bring 
enduring improvements in productivity and competitiveness, growth could 
weaken even further and inflationary strains could re-emerge.  
Developmental and Regulatory Policies 
31. Since this is the Annual Policy, as per standard practice, it also includes 
developmental and regulatory policies. Let me briefly indicate some of important 
initiatives in this regard.  
32. I will begin with initiatives for further strengthening the regulatory and 
supervisory framework.  
? We have finalised the prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances by 
banks and financial institutions based on the Mahapatra Committee 
recommendations.  They will be issued during the month.  5 
 
? The unhedged portion of the foreign currency exposure of corporate has been 
a source of concern.  To address this, we have decided to increase the risk 
weights and provisioning requirements on banks’ exposure to corporates on 
account of corporates’ unhedged forex exposure positions. 
? As indicated in the guidelines for new bank licenses, we are in the process of 
preparing a discussion paper on the banking structure for India. The 
discussion paper will cover issues such as consolidation of large sized banks 
with a view to having a few global banks, the desirability and practicality of 
having small, localised banks as preferred vehicles for financial inclusion, the 
need for a differentiated licensing regime for investment banks, and 
conversion of urban cooperative banks into commercial banks. The discussion 
paper will take into account international experience as well as our domestic 
situation. 
33. Let me now turn to a few initiatives for furthering financial inclusion. 
? The Reserve Bank’s website contains FAQs on KYC/AML/CFT requirements.  
The Reserve Bank has also made active efforts to disseminate these 
requirements.  However, recent developments, as also the needs of financial 
inclusion, have made it necessary for us to disseminate the requirements in a 
more lucid way.  We will revise the FAQs accordingly.  
? The Reserve Bank attaches great importance to speedier branch expansion in 
unbanked rural centres for ensuring seamless roll out of the Direct Benefit 
Transfer Scheme of the Government.  Towards this end, banks are being 
advised to front load the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a 
3 year cycle co-terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plans (FIP). 
Furthermore, instructions are being issued to banks to open bank accounts for 
all eligible households. 
? Improving credit delivery to micro and small enterprises is a focus area.  In 
light of the feedback received from the stakeholders, we are enhancing the 
loan limits to micro and small enterprises for priority sector classification.  
? In order to extend the institutional mechanism for financial inclusion to urban 
areas, we have decided to bring all districts in metropolitan areas under the 
fold of the Lead Bank Scheme.    
34. The Statement contains several initiatives to strengthen the financial market 
infrastructure.  
? We felt that there is a need to improve the interface of exporters with banks 
and financial institutions to cut delays and streamline procedures. Towards 
this end, we reported earlier that we would constitute a technical committee to 
study various issues such as availability of credit, transaction costs, insurance, 
factoring and other procedural aspects. The Technical Committee chaired by 
Executive Director Padmanabhan submitted its report last month. We are 
examining the recommendations and will put out the report on our website 
shortly.  
? In a move towards further liberalization, we have decided to allow Foreign 
Institutional Investors to hedge their currency risk by using exchange traded 
currency futures in the domestic exchanges. 
35. As envisaged in the  Reserve Bank’s vision document on ‘Payment Systems in 
India’, we have  decided to allow non-bank authorised entities to be part of the 
payment system infrastructure. Separately, we will prepare a discussion paper for 6 
 
examining the measures to be taken to mitigate and eliminate concentration risk in 
the payment system infrastructure. 
36. Finally a comment on meeting the growing demand for banknotes and coins in 
the country. We are streamlining the system of distribution of banknotes and coins 
and are exploring alternative avenues for their distribution by banks. The mechanism 
for detection and reporting of counterfeit banknotes is also being improved.  To 
further this, we will shortly introduce a scheme of incentives for banks. 
37. I have highlighted only a few of the developmental and regulatory initiatives. 
There are a host of other initiatives in Part B of the policy document. I urge you to go 
through the policy document in detail.  
38. Let me conclude by summarising our macroeconomic concerns. Growth 
slowed much more than anticipated, with both manufacturing and services activity 
hamstrung by supply bottlenecks and sluggish external demand. Most lead indicators 
suggest a turnaround this year, albeit at a slow pace. Inflation eased significantly in 
the fourth quarter of last year although upside pressures remain, both at wholesale 
and retail levels. The growth-inflation outlook indicated in the Policy Statement is also 
beset with risks such as the still high twin deficits, the vulnerability of our external 
sector to sudden stop and reversal of capital flows, inhibited investment sentiment 
and tightening supply constraints, particularly in the food and infrastructure sectors. 
The challenge for the Reserve Bank is to calibrate monetary policy to address these 
risks and bring inflation down to the tolerance threshold in order to return the 
economy to a sustainable high growth trajectory in the years ahead.  
39. Thank you for your attention." 
 
              
Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2012-2013/1823                   Chief General Manager 
         