 
? ? ? ?? ?  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? ?????? ?? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
????? ?????,  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ??? , ??. ??. ??. ?? ? , ? ? ?-400001 
? ?? ? ? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai-400001 
? ??/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? ?? ?/Fax: 91 22 22660358 ?- ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
      
September 4, 2013 
 
Statement by Dr. Raghuram Rajan on taking office on September 4, 2013 
 
Video 
 
rd
Good Evening. I took charge this afternoon as the 23 Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of India. These are not easy times, and the economy faces 
challenges. At the same time, India is a fundamentally sound economy with a bright 
future. Our task today is to build a bridge to the future, over the stormy waves 
produced by global financial markets. I have every confidence we will succeed in 
doing that. Today I want to articulate some first steps, concrete actions we will take, 
as well as some intentions to take actions based on plans we will formulate.  
 
Before I turn to specifics, let me repeat what I said on the day I was 
appointed. The Reserve Bank is a great institution with a tradition of integrity, 
independence, and professionalism.  I congratulate Dr. Subbarao on his leadership 
in guiding the Bank through very difficult times, and I look forward to working with the 
many dedicated employees of the RBI to further some of the important initiatives he 
started. I have been touched by the warmth with which the RBI staff have welcomed 
me. 
To the existing traditions of the RBI, which will be the bedrock of our work, we 
will emphasise two other traditions that become important in these times: 
transparency and predictability.  At a time when financial market are volatile, and 
there is some domestic political uncertainty because of impending elections, the 
Reserve Bank of India should be a beacon of stability as to its objectives. That is not 
to say we will never surprise markets with actions. A central bank should never say 
“Never”!  But the public should have a clear framework as to where we are going, 
and understand how our policy actions fit into that framework. Key to all this is 
communication, and I want to underscore communication with this statement on my 
first day in office. 
 
Monetary Policy 
 
We will be making the first monetary policy statement of my term on 
September 20. I have postponed the originally set date a bit so that between now 
and then, I have enough time to consider all major developments in the required 
detail.  I will leave a detailed explanation of our policy stance till then, but let me 
emphasize that the RBI takes its mandate from the RBI Act of 1934, which says the 
Reserve Bank for India was constituted  
 
1 
 
????? ??????????????“to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to 
securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit 
system of the country to its advantage;” 
 
The primary role of the central bank, as the Act suggests, is monetary 
stability, that is, to sustain confidence in the value of the country’s money. Ultimately, 
this means low and stable expectations of inflation, whether that inflation stems from 
domestic sources or from changes in the value of the currency, from supply 
constraints or demand pressures. I have asked Deputy Governor Urjit Patel, together 
with a panel he will constitute of outside experts and RBI staff, to come up with 
suggestions in three months on what needs to be done to revise and strengthen our 
monetary policy framework.  A number of past committees, including the FSLRC, 
have opined on this, and their views will also be considered carefully. 
 
 
Inclusive Development 
 
I talked about the primary role of the RBI as preserving the purchasing power 
of the rupee, but we have two other important mandates; inclusive growth and 
development, as well as financial stability. 
 
As the central bank of a developing country, we have additional tools to 
generate growth – we can accelerate financial development and inclusion. Rural 
areas, especially our villages, as well as small and medium industries across the 
country, have been important engines of growth even as large company growth has 
slowed. But access to finance is still hard for the poor, and for rural and small and 
medium industries. We need faster, broad based, inclusive growth leading to a rapid 
fall in poverty. 
 
The Indian public would benefit from more competition between banks, and 
banks would benefit from more freedom in decision making.  The RBI will shortly 
issue the necessary circular to completely free bank branching for domestic 
scheduled commercial banks in every part of the country. No longer will a well-run 
scheduled domestic commercial bank have to approach the RBI for permission to 
open a branch. We will, of course, require banks to fulfil certain inclusion criteria in 
underserved areas in proportion to their expansion in urban areas, and we will 
restrain improperly managed banks from expanding until they convince supervisors 
of their stability. But branching will be free for all scheduled domestic commercial 
banks except the poorly managed.  
 
There has been a fair amount of public attention devoted to new bank 
licenses. The RBI will give out new bank licenses as soon as consistent with the 
highest standards of transparency and diligence. We are in the process of 
constituting an external committee. Dr. Bimal Jalan, an illustrious former governor, 
has agreed to chair it, and the committee will be composed of individuals with 
impeccable reputation. This committee will screen licence applicants after an initial 
compilation of applications by the RBI staff. The external committee will make 
recommendations to the RBI governor and deputy governors, and we will propose 
the final slate to the Committee of the RBI Central Board. I hope to announce the 
licences within, or soon after, the term of DG Anand Sinha, who has been 
shepherding the process. His term expires in January 2014. 
2 
  
We will not stop with these licences. The RBI has put an excellent document 
on its website exploring the possibility of differentiated licences for small banks and 
wholesale banks, the possibility of continuous or “on-tap” licensing, and the 
possibility of converting large urban co-operative banks into commercial banks. We 
will pursue these creative ideas of the RBI staff and come up with a detailed road 
map of the necessary reforms and regulations for freeing entry and making the 
licensing process more frequent after we get comments from stakeholders.  
 
India has a number of foreign owned banks, many of whom have been with us 
a long time and helped fuel our growth. They have been in the forefront of 
innovation, both in terms of improving productivity, as well as in terms of creating 
new products.  We would like them to participate more in our growth, but in 
exchange we would like more regulatory and supervisory control over local 
operations so that we are not blindsided by international developments. The RBI will 
encourage qualifying foreign banks to move to a wholly owned subsidiary structure, 
where they will enjoy near national treatment. We are in the process of sorting out a 
few remaining issues so this move can be made. 
 
Finally, our banks have a number of obligations that pre-empt lending, and in 
fact, allow what Dr. Rakesh Mohan, an illustrious former deputy-governor, called 
“lazy banking”.  One of the mandates for the RBI in the Act is to ensure the flow of 
credit to the productive sectors of the economy. In this context, we need to reduce 
the requirement for banks to invest in government securities in a calibrated way, to 
what is strictly needed from a prudential perspective. 
   
This cannot be done overnight, of course. As government finances improve, 
the scope for such reduction will increase. Furthermore, as the penetration of other 
financial institutions such as pension funds and insurance companies increases, we 
can reduce the need for regular commercial banks to invest in government 
securities. 
  
We also subject our banks to a variety of priority sector lending requirements. 
I believe there is a role for such a mandate in a developing country – it is useful to 
nudge banks into areas they would otherwise not venture into. But that mandate 
should adjust to the needs of the economy, and should be executed in the most 
efficient way possible. Let us remember that the goal is greater financial access in all 
parts of the country, rather than meeting bureaucratic norms.  I am asking Dr 
Nachiket Mor to head a committee that will assess every aspect of our approach to 
financial inclusion to suggest the way forward. In these ways, we will further the 
development mission of the RBI. 
 
Financial Markets  
 
Some see financial markets as competition to banks. They are that, but they 
are also complementary. Too many risks in the Indian economy gravitate towards 
commercial banks even when they should be absorbed by arm’s length financial 
markets. But for our financial markets to play their necessary roles of providing risk 
absorbing long term finance, and of generating information about investment 
opportunities, they have to have depth. We cannot create depth by banning position 
taking, or mandating trading based only on well-defined “legitimate” needs. Money is 
3 
 fungible so such bans get subverted, but at some level, all investment is an act of 
faith and of risk taking. Better that investors take positions domestically and provide 
depth and profits to our economy than they take our markets to foreign shores.  
 
Together with the government and regulators such as SEBI, we will steadily but 
surely liberalise our markets, as well as restrictions on investment and position 
taking.  Given the current market turmoil, our actions will have to be at a measured 
pace, but as a symbolic down payment, we will do the following: 
 
(1) Presently, exporters are permitted to re-book cancelled forward exchange contracts 
to the extent of 25 per cent of the value of cancelled contracts. This facility is not 
available for importers. To enable exporters/importers greater flexibility in their risk 
management, we will: 
(i) Enhance the limit available to exporters to 50 per cent; and 
(ii) Allow a similar facility to importers to the extent of 25 per cent. 
 
(2) Further to develop the money and G-sec markets, we will introduce cash settled 10 
year interest rate future contracts; 
 
(3) We will also examine the introduction of interest rate futures on overnight interest 
rates.   
Rupee internationalization and Capital Inflows 
 
This might be a strange time to talk about rupee internationalization, but we 
have to think beyond the next few months. As our trade expands, we will push for 
more settlement in rupees. This will also mean that we will have to open up our 
financial markets more for those who receive rupees to invest it back in. We intend to 
continue the path of steady liberalisation.  
 
The RBI wants to help our banks bring in safe money to fund our current 
account deficit. The Reserve Bank of India has been receiving requests from banks 
to consider a special concessional window for swapping FCNR deposits that will be 
mobilised following the recent relaxations permitted by the Reserve Bank of India. 
We will offer such a window to the banks to swap the fresh FCNR (B) dollar funds, 
mobilised for a minimum tenor of three years and over, at a fixed rate of 3.5 per cent 
per annum for the tenor of the deposit. 
 
Further, based again on requests received from banks, we have decided that 
the current overseas borrowing limit of 50 per cent of the unimpaired Tier I capital 
will be raised to 100 per cent and that the borrowings mobilised under this provision 
can be swapped with Reserve Bank of India at the option of the bank at a 
concessional rate of 100 basis points below the ongoing swap rate prevailing in the 
market. 
 
The above schemes will be open up to November 30, 2013, which coincides with 
when the relaxations on NRI deposits expire. The Reserve Bank reserves the right to 
close the scheme earlier with due notice. 
 
4 
 Financial Infrastructure 
 
Finance thrives when financial infrastructure is strong. The RBI has been 
working hard to improve the financial infrastructure of the country – it has made 
tremendous advances, for example, in strengthening the payment and settlement 
systems in the country. Similarly, it has been working on improving information 
sharing through agencies such as credit bureaus and rating agencies. I propose to 
carry on such work, which will be extremely important to enhance the safety and 
speed of flows as well as the quality and quantity of lending in the country.  
 
On the retail side, I particularly want to emphasise the use of the unique ID, 
Aadhaar, in building individual credit histories. This will be the foundation of a 
revolution in retail credit.  
 
For small and medium firms, we intend to facilitate Electronic Bill Factoring 
Exchanges, whereby MSME bills against large companies can be accepted 
electronically and auctioned so that MSMEs are paid promptly. This was a proposal 
in the report of my Committee on Financial Sector reforms in 2008, and I intend to 
see it carried out. 
 
Finance is not just about lending, it is about recovering loans also. We have to 
improve the efficiency of the recovery system, especially at a time of economic 
uncertainty like the present. Recovery should be focused on efficiency and fairness – 
preserving the value of underlying valuable assets and jobs where possible, even 
while redeploying unviable assets to new uses and compensating employees fairly.  
All this should be done while ensuring that contractual priorities are met. The system 
has to be tolerant of genuine difficulty while coming down hard on mismanagement 
or fraud.  
 
Promoters do not have a divine right to stay in charge regardless of how badly 
they mismanage an enterprise, nor do they have the right to use the banking system 
to recapitalize their failed ventures.  
 
Most immediately, we need to accelerate the working of Debt Recovery 
Tribunals and Asset Reconstruction Companies.  Deputy Governor Anand Sinha and 
I will be examining the necessary steps. 
 
I have asked Deputy Governor Dr. Chakrabarty to take a close look at rising 
NPAs and the restructuring/recovery process, and we too will be taking next steps 
shortly.  RBI proposes to collect credit data and examine large common exposures 
across banks. This will enable the creation of a central repository on large credits, 
which we will share with the banks. This will enable banks themselves to be aware of 
building leverage and common exposures.  
 
While the resumption of stalled projects and stronger growth will alleviate 
some of the banking system difficulties, we will encourage banks to clean up their 
balance sheets, and commit to a capital raising programme where necessary. The 
bad loan problem is not alarming yet, but it will only fester and grow if left 
unaddressed. 
 
5 
 We will also follow the FSLRC suggestion of setting up an enhanced 
resolution structure for financial firms. The working group on resolution regimes for 
financial institutions is looking at this and we will examine its recommendations and 
take action soon after. 
 
Households 
 
Everyone has a right to a safe investment vehicle, to the ability to transfer 
remittances to loved ones, to insurance, to obtain direct benefits from the 
government without costly intervening intermediaries, and to raise funding for viable 
investment opportunities. In addition, access to credit to smooth consumption needs 
or to tide over emergencies is desirable, especially for households in the lower 
income deciles, when it does not impose unserviceable debt loads. The Reserve 
Bank will continue to play its part in making all this possible.  
 
In particular, I want to announce a number of specific actions:   
 
First, households have expressed a desire to be protected against CPI 
inflation. Together with the government, we will issue Inflation Indexed Savings 
Certificates linked to the CPI New Index to retail investors by end- November 2013.   
 
Second, we will implement a national giro-based Indian Bill Payment System 
such that households will be able to use bank accounts to pay school fees utilities, 
medical bills, and make person to person transfers electronically.  We want to make 
payments anywhere anytime a reality. 
 
Third, only banks are currently allowed to deploy Point-of-Sale terminals, and 
these are largely set up by a few banks in urban areas. As announced in the Annual 
Monetary Policy statement, we will facilitate the setting up of “white” POS devices 
and mini ATMs by non-bank entities to cover the country so as to improve access to 
financial services in rural and remote areas. 
 
Fourth, currently holders of pre-paid instruments issued by non-bank entities 
are not allowed to withdraw cash from the outstanding balances in their pre-paid 
cards or electronic wallets. Given the vast potential of such instruments in meeting 
payments and remittance needs in remote areas, we intend to conduct a pilot 
enabling cash payments using such instruments and Aadhaar based identification. 
 
Finally, there is substantial potential for mobile based payments. We will set up a 
Technical Committee to examine the feasibility of using encrypted SMS-based funds 
transfer using an application that can run on any type of handset. We will also work 
to get banks and mobile companies to cooperate in rolling out mobile payments. 
Mobile payments can be a game changer both in the financial sector as well as to 
mobile companies. 
 
This is part of my short term time table for the Reserve Bank. It involves 
considerable change, and change is risky. But as India develops, not changing is 
even riskier. We have to keep what is good about our system, of which there is a 
tremendous amount, even while acting differently where warranted. The RBI has 
always changed when needed, not following the latest fad, but doing what is 
necessary. I intend to work with my excellent colleagues at the Reserve Bank, the 
6 
 senior management of which is represented around this table, to achieve the change 
we need. 
 
Finally, a personal note: Any entrant to the central bank governorship 
probably starts at the height of their popularity. Some of the actions I take will not be 
popular. The Governorship of the Central Bank is not meant to win one votes or 
Facebook “likes”. But I hope to do the right thing, no matter what the criticism, even 
while looking to learn from the criticism – Rudyard Kipling put it better when he 
mused about the requirements of an ideal central banker in his poem “If”: 
 
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, But make allowance for their 
doubting too: 
 
Kipling’s reference to “men” only dates these lines, but his words are clear. 
We will fill in details of what we have announced shortly, and lay out a broader 
roadmap of reforms soon after. Appropriate notifications will be issued shortly. As 
this is underway, we will turn to preparing the mid quarter policy statement.   
 
 
 
                                                                                                            Sabeeta Badkar 
Press Release : 2013-2014/493                                          Assistant Manager  
7 
 