External Debt Management:
Issues, Lesson and Preventive Measures
May 6, 1999
India was among the few emerging markets which were relatively unaffected by the
Asian crisis mainly on account of appropriate macro-policies and prudent debt management.
Nonetheless, the lessons of the Asian crisis should not be lost sight of. Against this
background, the World Bank, the Ministry of Finance ( ), Government of India, and the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) jointly organised a seminar on External Debt Management:
Issues, Lessons and Preventive Measures for placing in a perspective the lessons of the recent
crisis, and for generating an informed debate on the debt management capability of the Indian
economy at Kovalam , , Kerala . Participants at the seminar belonged to
the academic world, the World Bank, the Commonwealth Secretariat, financial institutions,
corporate sector, the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India. The seminar
deliberated on four broad themes (a) Managing External Debt: Lessons from International
Experience, (b) Issues in External Debt Management, (c) External Debt Management: A
Corporate Perspective and (d) Debt Database Management Issues. The papers and
proceedings of the seminar, edited by Dr. A.Vasudevan, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of
India, have been brought out in the form of a book External Debt Management: Issues,
Lessons and Preventive Measures.
In his inaugural address, the Hon’ble Finance Minister of the Government of Kerala,
Shri T. Sivadasa Menon, lauded India’s cautious and prudent approach towards external debt
management. Dr.  , Chief Economic Adviser, Government of India
highlighted the fact that because of sound policies aided by strong growth of exports and
remittances, increased reliance on non-debt creating flows, strict control with respect to
external commercial borrowings and controls on short-term debts, the policies with respect to
external debt management have been successful. In his remarks, Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India, dwelt upon the conceptual framework towards an
improved understanding of external debt management issues, delineated major areas
requiring further attention and highlighted operational issues for further course of action.
Papers
• Nihal Kappagoda
• 
• ‘Factors Affecting External Indebtedness: Cross-Country Evidence’ by Mridul 
and 
• 
• ‘The East Asian Crisis and Bibek 
• M.D.Patra et al.
• ‘ et al.
• 
Introduction
‘External Debt Management: A Corporate Perspective’ by ICICI
Mohanty Short-Term and Volatile Capital Flows’ by Deepak 
Experience’  by ‘External Debt Management: The Indian 
Debroy Short-Term Debt’ by 
‘Implications of the East Asian Crisis for Debt Management’ by John Williamson
Sagar Seema 
Saggar
Raj Kumar Liberalising Economies’ by ‘Debt Sustainability Issues: New Challenges for 
‘The Financial Crisis and Its Impact on Debt Management in India’ by 
The main titles of papers presented at the seminar were:
N.Acharya Shankar
Thiruvananthapuram
MoF2
• Shyamala Gopinath et al.
• ‘External Commercial Borrowing: Issues in Monitoring of Debt’ by Ajit Joshi and
• 
Major Issues
(i) 
 
 Lessons from South East Asia for debt sustainability like high corporate debt to
equity ratio, large short-term debts, lack of transparent information on external
debt, boom-bust cycle in asset markets which put pressure on financial sector
 Need to incorporate feedback from debt management into the growth strategy.
In the years to come, as debt management would evolve into overall liability
 
 On the issue of capital account convertibility (CAC), the need for (a)
comprehensive cost benefit analysis and (b) identification of policy instruments
 Necessity to closely monitor the early warning signals in order to ensure that the
debt burden does not impose a constraint on growth. The extreme volatility of
capital movements, especially short-term flows at times of financial crises and
contagion, points out the need for policy action to insulate domestic economies
Linking the access of external resources of domestic entities to productive
 Institution of an enabling legal framework for facilitating the conduct of external
debt management. The reporting requirements should, however, not be
liberalisation process.
 Need to continuously monitor external commercial borrowings with end-use
restrictions in stock markets and real estate in view of keeping external debt
within prudent limits. Loans raised with a bullet repayment facility needed
 Need to develop suitable proactive risk management instruments like derivatives
and futures to hedge country’s external debt to adverse movements of exchange
 Implications of Euro for external financing in India and in particular External
Commercial Borrowings (ECB). It is expected that introduction of euro could
open financing opportunities for Indian corporates who have been largely
tapping the markets abroad in US dollars in the forms of bond, syndicated loans
and 
(iii)(ii)
GDRs.
(xii)
rates and interest rates abroad.
(xi)
special focus by policy authorities.
(x)
considered as inconsistent with the 
(ix)
utilization should continue to be the basis for debt management strategy.
 (viii)
from such effects.
(vii)
available to the policy maker to avoid the risk associated with CAC.
(vi)
Need for prudent structuring of the debt profile by the policy authorities. (v)
management, a more holistic approach is required for the debt management
(iv)
and volatile nature of capital flows.
Liquidity in the event of a crisis.
Sustainability  and solvency of external debt
The major issues emanating from the papers and proceedings of the Seminar are:
Y.V.Reddy ‘Management of External Debt: Agenda for Future’ by 
Prithwis Jana
‘Implications of Euro for External Financing in India’ by 3
With the emergence of commercial borrowings as a source of external finance
and as an important component of external debt and implications of 
on foreign exchange markets, the availability of comprehensive external debt
statistics and close monitoring of disbursements and repayment schedule attains
 Close monitoring of external debt indicators and debt in terms of both original
and residual maturity (i.e., say debt maturing in the next one year) as also
 Need for continuous monitoring of contingent liabilities which have the
 Interface between the government, the corporates and the Reserve Bank of India
Action Points
Apart from major issues, a number of action points requiring urgent attention emanated
from the discussions:
i. Need for greater feedback from corporates, not just information, but also advice on
stance of policy. The corporates need to be taken into confidence so that they can
appreciate the logic behind policies.
ii. In regard to ECBs, there is a case to avoid large exposures to select corporate groups to
avoid micro-corporate failures spilling over into macro-systemic problems. The
advantage of borrowing by financial intermediaries, instead of corporates, while
allocating amounts within ECB ceilings, therefore, needs to be examined. Another area
of policy focus at the time of approvals would have to be to grant greater concern to
iii. The policy thrust should continue to be on a shift from debt to non-debt creating flows.
But, as the servicing of non-debt liabilities, in the form of dividend and profits, is bound
to increase in tandem with an increase in the underlying non-debt flows, it would be
desirable to set up a Technical Committee to go into the entire gamut of issues to assess
Availability of the Publication
The book titled External Debt Management: Issues, Lessons and Preventive
Measures, edited by Dr. , priced at Rs.250 (inland), is available for sale at the
Sales Section, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India,  Building, Ground Floor, P.M. Road, Fort,
 400 001.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 1998-99/1372
Mumbai
Amar
A.Vasudevan
and improve monitoring of payment obligations.
 
bunching of maturity of debt.
 
 
for timely and comprehensive collection of external debt statistics.
(xvi)
potential of draining the external resources of the country.
(xv)
bunching of repayments.
(xiv)
added importance. Improving the reporting of financial sector on external debt.
amortisation
 (xiii)