May 29, 1999
The Government of India has modified the existing scheme of Relief Bonds to provide for the
form of holding Relief Bond.
Bond at 714 branches of public sector banks designated at present as receiving offices in addition
Bonds, which would be accounted in the same Bond Ledger Account. The application for bonds
in the form of Promissory Note will, however, be issued only at the offices of the Reserve Bank
of India.
for investing in Relief Bonds.
www.goirb.rbi.org.in .
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/1479
Ledger Accounts in their books in the name of the investors with the amount of investment and
and application forms for Relief Bonds can be directly accessed through URL:
the Reserve Bank of India and also on the website of the Reserve Bank of India. The notification
The notification and application forms are available at all the branches of the public sector banks,
continue to receive the applications both, for Bond Ledger Account and Promissory Note form,
servicing at the bank branch nearest to the investor, the Reserve Bank offices at 14 centres will
While the Bond Ledger Account affords protection against loss/theft with the facility of
transferability and nomination. The holders can also make additional investments in Relief
at the branch in the Bond Ledger Account. The Bond Ledger Accounts also offer the facility of
warrants. A  "Certificate of Holding" will be given to the holder evidencing the holding of bonds
pay interest periodically by credit to the bank accounts of the holders or by issue of interest
to 14 public debt offices of the Reserve Bank of India. The receiving offices will open the Bond
The facility of Bond Ledger Account has also been made available to the investors in Relief
of the investors for a bond in dematerialised form without the hassels associated with the paper
accompanied by the decentralised servicing at the receiving offices and meets the long felt need
issue of bonds in a dematerialised (demat) form. Called "Bond Ledger Account", the facility is
now in demat form
9% Government of India Relief Bonds