A Committee was formed by Reserve Bank of India with Shri V.S.N. 
Chief General Manager-In-Charge of the Department of Non-banking Supervision
(DNBS) as Chairman and Shri A.K. , Deputy General Manager, DNBS as
Member-Secretary with S/ Shri S.P. , President – Indian Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI) and other senior  of ICAI, namely, A.C. Shah,
H.N. , V.C. ,  Bhattacharyya , Dr. A.  and S.
 ( Retd ) Chief  Manager of the Reserve Bank as members, to
explore the possibility of redesigning the present formats of the financial statements
being prepared by the NBFCs.  The need for separate format, besides being one of the
recommendations of the Expert Group on designing the supervisory framework for
NBFCs ( Khanna Committee), was being felt for long since the present formats under
schedule VI to the Companies Act, are essentially designed for non-financial companies
and the risks associated with the activities of the financial companies .  The Committee
The revised formats proposed by Committee broadly follow the existing formats
prescribed under the Companies Act with additional disclosures in respect of maturity
profile of assets and liabilities, sector-wise concentration of assets and liabilities, details
in respect of overdue loans and other credits, non-performing assets and provisioning
, valuation of investments, etc. as schedules to the main balance-sheet and
profit and loss accounts; formats for these additional schedules have been provided in the
that :
 
2000 and onwards to all those NBFCs which are required to apply to the Reserve
 In respect of companies having non-financial business also as part of their business
activities, separate schedules in respect of such activities need to be annexed to the
 For the purpose of classifying a company as a financial company, the companies
having 40 per cent of the tangible assets as financial assets, will be recognised as
NBFCs and will, therefore, be required to compile their financial statements in the
 In addition to the suggested disclosures in respect of the risk profiles and requirement
of prudential norms, the companies will be providing further information in terms of
Annexures.
The Reserve bank has decided to obtain the views of the Department of Company
Affairs, Government of India on the proposed format and also circulate the report among
the members of the Informal Advisory Group on NBFCs constituted by the Reserve Bank
which includes representatives of the Associations of NBFCs as members, for the benefit
main ,Murty
the present regulatory requirements as 
d)
proposed formats.
c)
balance-sheet and profit and loss account.
b)
Bank for registration under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
The suggested formats, on adoption, be made applicable from the financial year 1999- a)
Report.  The Committee has further recommended 
thereagainst
has submitted its Report to the Reserve Bank on September 30, 1999.
Genral Bandyopadhyay
Chander A.K. Darak Motiwalla
functionaires
Chhajed
Ghosh
October 4, 1999
Statements of Non-Banking Financial Companies
Report of the Committee for Redesigning of Financialof their suggestion on the proposed formats .  The Report has also been placed on the RBI
website ( URL : http://www.rbi.org.in ) The Reserve Bank will take a final decision on the
Alpana Killawala
Release : 1999-2000/460 Press 
General Manager
recommendations of the Committee after considering the suggestions received.