SAARCFinance Seminar on
January 26, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India will host the first ever finance seminar of South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries. The seminar will be held on
inaugurated by Shri S.P. Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank. The seminar will focus on
Emerging rends in Supervision in SAARC countries.
Central Bank Governors and Finance Secretaries of the SAARC region met in October 1998.
India in the last week of January 1999 on supervision trends for the supervisors of the region.
The present Seminar is being held against the backdrop of the South East Asian crisis. The
crisis has underscored that the soundness of the financial system is essential in successful
pursuit of macroeconomic policies in an open economy framework. In this context,
International best practices in this area are being sought to be implemented, so that the
evolving financial markets in developing countries would be aware of the state of soundness
of the system as a whole and would not be subject to shocks. The process would also
facilitate transparency and availability of symmetric information. The Bank for International
practices in regulation and supervision of financial sector, they still would need to know the
participants at the Seminar include Executive Directors and Deputy Governors, central banks
Authority , Central Bank of Sri Lanka, State Bank
of Pakistan and the Reserve Bank of India.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Authority of Bhutan, Maldives Monetary 
of the SAARC countries, viz., Bangladesh Bank, Nepal Rastra Bank, Royal Monetary
the central banks of the SAARC region and facilitate exchange of their experiences. The
bring face to face the senior officials associated with supervision of the financial system in
Against this background, SAARC Finance Seminar on 'Emerging Trends in Supervision' will
external payments transactions.
important for countries in the SAARC region, which are increasingly liberalising their
implementation of different principles of the code of best practices. This is particularly
These experiences will help to give insights into the institutional factors that facilitate the
experiences of different countries in the process of adoption of international best practices.
international institutions. While most countries strive to adopt these international best
system. These practices are widely welcomed by international market participants and other
settlements, Basle, has codified the best practices in regulation and supervision of financial
and is being increasingly focussed upon in most developing and developed countries.
supervision of banks and non-banking financial companies has gained in critical importance
It was suggested at that time that the Reserve Bank of India should organise a meeting in
regarding economic cooperation in the region. To give forward thrust to this initiative, the
The seminar is the culmination of the initiative taken by the Prime Minister of India last year
January 27 and 28, 1999 in the College of Agricultural Banking, Pune and will be
'Emerging Trends in Supervision'
RBI's Release : 1998-99/975
Press 