SAARCFINANCE SEMINAR
January 27, 1999
Indian Banking System
Sound and Resilient : RBI Deputy Governor
“Strengthened prudential regulation and supervision of the financial sector over the
last few years, have helped sustain the health of Indian banking system enabling it to
withstand the contagion effect of the East Asian syndrome.” This was stated by Shri S P
Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India. Shri Talwar added that the Indian
supervisory system has already made much headway in realigning itself to the emerging
needs, particularly addressing the risks inherent in liberalisation and globalisation of the
Indian economy. The prudential and disclosure norms applicable to the Indian financial
system generally conform to the best global practices besides ensuring transparency in
published accounts.
Shri Talwar was addressing senior officials of the central banks of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries, today while inaugurating the first-
ever SAARC Finance Seminar on ‘Emerging Trends in Supervision’. The two-day
SAARCFinance Seminar has been hosted by the Reserve Bank of India in the College of
Agricultural Banking, Pune.
Pointing out that the Indian banking system has emerged strong and resilient as a
result of on-going reforms, the Deputy Governor stated that  as against losses of Rs. 3,293
crore in 1992-93 and Rs. 4,349 crore in 1993-94 – the initial years of introduction of
prudential norms – the public sector banks in India have recorded net profit of Rs. 5,027 
in 1997-98.  Net non-performing assets ( NPAs) of these banks formed 8.2 percent of the net
advances and 3.3 per cent of the total assets as at the end of March 1998.
Dwelling at length on the issue of NPAs in the Indian banking system, currently being
commented upon by various international and domestic analysts/groups,   pointed
out that the NPAs of Indian banking system are a legacy of the prudential norms introduced
for the first time in India in 1992-93. Further, as a result of the lack of focussed attention on
the end use of funds by banks, the borrowers in many instances went for projects and
purposes other than those included or prioritised in the original schemes. To avoid such a
situation, the Reserve Bank has asked the banks to set up an efficient and appropriate loan
review mechanism. He also pointed out that the Indian banks have already provided for more
than 50 per cent of their NPAs, which is often ignored by the international agencies while
evaluating NPA status of the Indian banking system. Indian banks have also secured their
collaterals, he added.
loans to a very large extent by 
Talwar Shri
croreIn the context of the pressure to reduce the asset classification norm to one quarter in
respect of past due loans being build up by various international fora , the Deputy Governor
asserted that the central bank has taken a view that the international practices should not be
merely mimicked but should be carefully evaluated and applied to a country’s specific
situation keeping in view the support systems.  In countries like India and even in some 
developed countries, the trade and commerce cycle combined with payment settlement
systems extends beyond a quarter. “Unless the underlying commercial and payment systems
move towards faster settlement of trade transactions, we do not see any immediate
compulsion to shift to a norm for asset classification of one quarter in respect of past dues,”
he affirmed.  He also stressed that it is easy to introduce stricter norms but it requires a lot of
discipline to resist leeways sought by banks arising at implementation stage. The Reserve
Bank was not in favour of such leniency, he stated and added that “We strongly believe that
once the norms are laid by the central bank, they should be complied with in letter and in
spirit by the constituent institutions. Though it has taken some time for us to introduce the
The Deputy Governor nevertheless exhorted the banks in India to focus attention on
the need for expediting legal reforms recommended by the Committee on Banking Sector
Reforms ( Narasimham Committee II) in realisation of collaterals. He added that the banks
also have to activate the procedures of compromise settlements and their recovery machinery
Earlier, while tracing the evolution of supervisory practices in India since 1992, 
Talwar informed the participants that the initial focus of the banking sector reform in India
was on solvency issues. Subsequently, under the guidance of the Board for Financial
Supervision that was constituted in 1994, the entire supervisory mechanism was realigned. It
now focusses on making the Indian financial system strong and stable. On-site and off-site
supervision and rating of banks on the basis of capital adequacy, asset quality, management,
earnings, liquidity and system (CAMELS) are important supervisory tools with the Reserve
Bank. Through its off-site monitoring and surveillance system, the Reserve Bank also
monitors capital adequacy, asset quality, large credits and concentrations, connected lending
and earnings.
According to the Deputy Governor, the Reserve Bank will now monitor risk
exposures of banks at quarterly intervals.  By next year, the Reserve Bank will introduce the
second  of off-site returns of risk management aspects and consolidated supervision
and in recognition of the market risk faced by banks particularly in the context of
deregulation of interest rates in India, the Reserve Bank has also issued broad framework for
asset-liability management (ALM) that will be operational from April 1, 1999.  The ALM
framework takes into account the variance in the business profiles of banks in the public and
The Deputy Governor informed that in recognition of the need for greater
transparency in the balance sheets of banks, the Reserve Bank has already asked banks to
disclose the break-up of the provisions made towards NPAs , depreciation on investments and
other purposes. These disclosures will be in addition to the disclosures banks are required to
make on their capital adequacy ratio and the level of non-performing assets. The Reserve
Bank is committed to bring about greater transparency in banks’ balance sheets. The South
East Asian crisis has also underscored the need for close coordination among central banks
and governments of the world as well as international financial institutions in promoting
private sector as well as the data/ information base available to them.
tranche
Shri
towards faster recovery.
prudential norms I am sure that the banks in India follow these norms as a gospel.”
wellstability, accountability and transparency in the financial systems. In this context the Deputy
Governor noted that the Reserve Bank has already adopted the Core Principles for Effective
Banking Supervision. The Core Principles evolved by the Basle Committee on Banking
Supervision seek to promote and enhance the standards of supervision.
The technical sessions on the first day comprised general discussion on regulation and
supervision with Shri Kondkar Ibrahim Khaled, Deputy Governor of Bangladesh Bank in the
Chair. Presentations were made by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and the Reserve Bank of
Background
The SAARC Finance Seminar is the culmination of the initiative taken by the Prime
Minister of India last year regarding economic co-operation in the region.  To give forward
thrust to this initiative, the Central Bank Governors and Finance Secretaries of the SAARC
region met in October 1998.  It was suggested at that time that the Reserve Bank of India
should organise a meeting in India in the last week of January 1999 on supervision trends for
the supervisors of the region.
The present Seminar is being held against the backdrop of the South East Asian crisis.
The crisis has underscored that the soundness of the financial system is essential in successful
pursuit of macroeconomic policies in an open economy framework. In this context,
supervision of banks and non-banking financial companies has gained in critical importance
Against th is background, SAARC Finance Seminar on ‘Emerging Trends in
Supervision’ will bring face to face the senior officials associated with supervision of the
financial system in the central banks of the SAARC region and facilitate exchange of their
experiences.  The participants at the Seminar include Deputy Governors and Executive
Directors, central banks of the SAARC countries, viz., Bangladesh Bank, Nepal Rastra Bank,
Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Maldives Monetary Authority, Central Bank of Sri
Lanka and the Reserve Bank of India.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
India.
and is being increasingly focussed upon in most developing and developed countries.