January 14, 1999
the Asset Liability Management system by April 1, 1999 inorder to measure the risks.
the level of computerisations, it was decided that banks 
Bank of India. Shri M S Verma, Honourary Advisor to the Reserve Bank was also
Bank of India had issued the draft guidelines in September last year for equipping the
was
proposed to be introduced from April 1, 1999.
will be upto the individual bank's board
to decide on the constitution of a Committee to oversee the ALM system of the bank.
forex market.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/938
management systems in banks in the context of volatility in the money/
significant issue. The banks, however, appreciated the need for having integrated risk
interpretation of data for asset-liability management was also pointed out to be a
refinance as a source of cash inflows, etc. Appropriate training to the staff especially in
working capital limits, volatile nature of short-term. Deposits and treating export
in the absence of computerised environment, estimation of gaps on account of unutilised
collecting reliable data - which is crucial to putting in place an effective ALM system -
difficulties in implementation of the ALM system. The difficulties pertained mainly to
Earlier, while reacting to the Reserve Bank's draft guidelines, the banks expressed certain
system by April 1, 2000. It was also agreed that it 
Systems to capture 100 per cent of data and also move over to a fortnightly reporting
basis. Banks will simultaneously work on putting in place Management Information
Banks have been advised to initially report the data to the Reserve Bank on a quarterly
banks to manage market risks in a scientific manner. The ALM system in banks 
present. As a significant step after introduction of prudential norms in 1992, the Reserve
banks. The meeting was presided over by Shri S P Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve
and foreign banks to discuss the draft guidelines on asset-liability management system in
The Reserve Bank of India had today invited chief executives of leading public, private
the data on their assets and liabilities in the first year of implementation of ALM system.
will capture at least 60 per cent of
Keeping in view the constraints of the prevailing management information system and
Chief executives of banks have been advised by the Reserve Bank of India to put in place
ALM system in banks
Reserve Bank of India to operationalise