March 13, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has asked banks and financial institutions (FIs) to submit to it details
of wilful defaulters. Banks and FIs have been asked to report all cases of wilful default, which
occurred, or are detected after March 31, 1999, on a quarterly basis. The information on wilful
default should cover all non-performing borrowal accounts with outstandings (funded facilities
and such non-funded facilities which are converted into funded facilities) aggregating Rs.25 lakh
and above.
Banks have also been asked to ensure that only the Boards of Directors are empowered to
consider fresh limits/renewal/enhancement of limits in the case of wilful defaulters, on the merits
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) misrepresentation/falsification of records,
(e) disposal/removal of securities without the knowledge of the bank,
(f) fraudulent transactions by the borrower.
It may be recalled that the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) had asked the Reserve Bank to
collect and disseminate among reporting banks and FIs, information on wilful defaults of Rs. 25
lakh and above. Pursuant to this, the Reserve Bank,  has formulated a scheme under which banks
and FIs, viz., IDBI, IFCI and ICICI will be required to submit to the Reserve Bank details of
wilful defaults. The scheme will come into effect from April 1, 1999. Banks and FIs will
accordingly have to file the first return on wilful defaults containing cases for the quarter April-
June 30, 1999. The return is required to be submitted within one month from the quarter to which
it relates. The return should contain inter-alia, the names of directors who are stakeholders only,
and not the names of professional/nominee directors of FIs, Central/State Governments. Further,
in case of consortium/multiple lending, the information on wilful defaulters should also be
shared by bank and FIs with the other participating/financing entities. Cases of wilful defaults at
overseas branches should also be reported if such disclosure is permitted under the laws of the
Returns for the subsequent quarter should contain fresh cases as well as those reported in the
The scheme requires that the identification of the default be made keeping in view the track
record of the borrower and not be decided on the basis of isolated transactions/incidents. The
default to be categorised as wilful must be intentional, deliberate and calculated.
earlier return but should exclude cases which have been subsequently regularised.
host country.
been misutilised
assets financed have either not been purchased or have been sold and proceeds have
siphoning off of funds to the detriment of the defaulting unit,
deliberate non-payment of dues despite adequate cash flow and good networth,
The Reserve Bank, for this purpose, has defined wilful default as:
of individual cases.
Wilful Defaulters
RBI asks Banks/FIs for InformationThe Reserve Bank has asked banks/FIs to form a committee consisting of three general
managers/deputy general managers or equivalent to general manager/deputy general manager for
The scheme is in addition to the Scheme of Disclosure of Information on Defaulting Borrowers
of banks and FIs, introduced by the Reserve Banks in April 1994, under which banks and
notified FIs are required to furnish to the Reserve Bank, details of defaulters of Rs. one crore and
above, classified as doubtful or loss, and suit filed accounts, as on March 31 and September 30,
and in addition to the publication of the list of borrowal accounts, against which banks and FIs
(Maureen 
Manager
Releases : 1998-99/1171
Press 
Shankar)
have filed suits for recovery of dues as on March 31 ever year.
identifying cases of wilful default.