The Reserve Bank of India has today issued detailed guidelines for risk management
system in banks. The guidelines broadly cover management of credit, market and operational
risks. The other risks, mainly, liquidity and interest rate risks were covered by the guidelines
on asset-liability management (ALM) system, which were issued to banks earlier. The
guidelines on risk management now being issued together with the ALM guidelines are
purported to serve as a benchmark to the banks, which are yet to establish an integrated risk
According to the guidelines the management of credit risk should receive the prime
attention of the top management. The banks should put in place the loan policy, approved by
the board of directors covering the methodologies for measurement, monitoring and control
of credit risk. Banks should also evolve comprehensive risk rating system that serves as a
single point indicator of diverse risk factors of counterparties in relation to credit and
investment decisions. The Reserve Bank guidelines have stated that the activities asset-
liability management committee and credit policy committee for management of credit and
The guidelines also require banks to evaluate portfolio quality on an on-going basis
rather than near about balance sheet date. The proposals for investment should be subjected
to the same degree of credit risk analysis as loan proposals. The risk evaluation should also
include balance sheet exposure. The current and potential credit exposures may be measured
on a daily basis. Banks have also been asked to evolve a suitable framework to provide a
centralised overview of the aggregate exposure on other banks, endeavour to develop an
internal matrix that reckons the counterparty and country risks. To manage liquidity risk,
banks have been asked to consider putting in place prudential limits on inter-bank
borrowings, especially call fundings, purchased funds, core deposits to core assets, off-
Banks have been asked to evaluate liquidity profile under bank-specific and market
crisis scenarios .  They have also been asked to prepare contingency plans to measure the
ability to withstand sudden adverse swings in liquidity conditions. Banks have been asked fix
a definite timeframe for moving over to value at risk ( VaR) and duration approaches for
measurement of interest rate risk. The guidelines also mention that it would be desirable to
adopt international standards on providing explicit capital cushion for the market risk to
which banks are exposed .  Banks should also adopt proper systems for measurement,
monitoring and control of operational risk that is emerging in the wake of phenomenal
increase in the volume of financial transactions. Banks operating in international markets
have been asked to develop by March 31, 2001 suitable methodologies for estimating and
maintaining economic capital. The other banks have been asked to formulate a medium-term
The guidelines on risk management have placed the primary responsibility of laying
down risk parameters and establishing the risk management and control system on the board
of directors. They have, however, stated that the implementation of the integrated risk
management could be assigned to a risk management committee or a committee of top
executives that reports to the board .  The risk management guidelines also require banks to
constitute a high-level credit policy committee to deal with issues pertaining to credit
sanction, disbursement and follow-up procedures and to manage and control credit risk on a
strategy to comply with these requirements.
balance sheet commitments, swapped funds, etc.
market risks need to be integrated.
management system.
October 21, 1999
RBI issues Guidelines for Risk Management Systems in Banks2
whole bank basis .  The Reserve Bank has further asked banks to concurrently set up an
independent credit risk management department to enforce and monitor compliance of the
The Reserve Bank has, however, stated that due to the diversity and varying size of
balance sheet items between banks, it may neither be possible nor may it be necessary to
adopt uniform risk management system. The design of risk management framework should,
therefore, be oriented towards the bank’s own requirement dictated by the size and
complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perception and the existing level of capital. In
other words, banks can evolve their own systems compatible with the type and size of
operations as well as risk perception. While doing so, banks may critically evaluate their
The Reserve Bank has also asked banks to place the circular together with the
guidelines before the board of directors at its next meeting. The board should review the
progress in implementation of the guidelines at half-yearly intervals and send to the Reserve
Bank by January 1, 2000, a copy of the board note indicating the gaps in the existing risk
www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
.
Release : 1999-2000/547 Press 
General Manager
The detailed guidelines have been placed on the RBI website at 
management practices and the policies and strategies for complying with the guidelines.
upgradation. put in place a proper system for covering the existing deficiencies and requisite 
existing risk management system in the light of the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank and
risk parameters and prudential limits set by the board/credit policy committee.