July 12, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has appointed a `Technical Advisory Committee on Money and
Government Securities Markets'. The committee will advise the Reserve Bank, on an ongoing basis,
It may be recalled that in January and April 1997, respectively, the Reserve Bank had constituted
two Committees, viz., Technical Advisory Committee on Government Securities Market and
Standing Committee on Money Market. Constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V.Reddy,
Deputy Governor, the Committees had drawn members from banks, financial services and
academic/research institutions. While the Technical Advisory Committee on Government Securities
Market was constituted with the objective to advise the Reserve Bank of India, on an on going basis,
on policy issues aimed at development of a healthy and vibrant Government securities market, the
objective of the Standing Committee on Money Market was to further develop the money market
In view of the increasing integration of the money and government securities markets and
commonality in the matters dealt with by the two committees, it was considered appropriate to merge
these two committees into the newly set up Technical Advisory Committee on Money and
The constitution of the Technical Advisory Committee on Money and Government Securities
Chairman
 
 1.
 Deputy Governor
 
  
Permanent Invitees
  
2. Shri 
 Deputy Governor
 
  
Reserve Bank of India
S.P.Talwar
Reserve Bank of India
Dr.Y.V.Reddy
Markets is :
Government Securities Markets.
and make it more efficient.
on development of the money and Government securities markets.
Government Securities Markets
RBI sets up Technical Advisory Committee on Money and3. Shri Jagdish 
 Deputy Governor
 
  
4. Chief Economic Adviser or
 
 
 Government of India
  
  
5. Prof.Ajay Shah
 Asst.Professor
 
  
6. Shri Arvind 
 
 Markets Group, India
 
  
7. Shri 
 
  
8. Mr.Dyfrig John
 Chief Executive Officer, India
 The 
  
HongKong & Shanghai Banking Corporation Ltd.
Chairman Industrial Development Bank of India
G.P.Gupta
Bank of America
Managing Director-Global Capital
Sethi
Indira Gandhi Institute for Development Research
Members
Ministry of Finance
nominee of Chief Economic Adviser
Reserve Bank of India
Capoor9. Shri 
 
 The 
  
10. Shri 
 Director
 
  
11. Prof. 
 
  
12. Shri 
 
 
  
13.
 
 
  
14. Shri 
 
 
  
15. Shri 
  
 
  
S.S.TaraporeDirectoir
Secretaries
State Bank of India
Managing Director
S.R.Iyer
National Stock Exchange Ltd.
Managing Director
Dr.R.H.Patil
Discount & Finance House of India Ltd.
Managing 
M.R.Ramesh
Investment Information Credit Rating Agency
Rakshit Mihir 
Credit Rating Information Services of India Ltd.
M.G.Bhide
Vysya Bank Ltd.
Chairman & Managing Director
K.R.Ramamurthy16. Smt.Usha 
 Chief General Manager
 
 
  
17. Shri 
 Adviser-in-Charge
 
 
  
Invitees
 
18. Dr.A.Vasudevan
 
 
  
19. Shri 
 
 
A nominee of Central Provident Fund will be invited as invitee, as required.
(i) To review an d recommend measures for deepening and widening the money and Government
securities markets including those relating to participants, products, institutional and infrastructural
To suggest measures for development of secondary mark et and promoting liquidity in money
To examine and advise on the evolving and desirable linkages between the money,
Government securities, foreign exchange and capital markets;
(iii)
market instruments and Government securities;
(ii)
arrangements, etc.;
The terms of reference of this Committee are :
Reserve Bank of India
Executive Director
Khizer Ahmed
Reserve Bank of India
Executive Director
Reserve Bank of India
Monetary Policy Department
K.Kanagasabapathy
Reserve Bank of India
Internal Debt Management Cell
ThoratTo review the infrastr ucture, legal and institutional arrangements for trading, transfer and
settlement in the money and Government securities markets in the context of the emerging payments
(v) To prepare and consider papers and advise on the policies and practices on topics relating to
To review the qualitative and quantitative aspects of risk management, accounting,
disclosure, settlement, legal framework, etc., in the money and Government securities markets and
render advise; and
To examine any other relevant issues having a bearing on these markets referred to it by the
The Committee could appoint technical groups consisting of its own members and/or outside
experts to study and submit recommendations on specific issues, if necessary. The Committee will
meet as often as it is required, but at least once in a quarter and will initially function for two years
Chhaya Raje
Manager
Press Release : 1999-2000/57
from the date of its first meeting.
Reserve Bank.
(vii)
(vi)
product/market development;
system;
(iv)