March 10, 1999
BACKGROUND
The States have been providing guarantees for facilitating the flow of funds to the priority
sectors, state public sector enterprises, developmental institutions and local bodies, for
commercial as well as non commercial activities and urban development. The growing need for
infrastructure at the State level and the recent initiatives to invite participation by the private
sector in such projects requiring huge investments, has put further demands on State
governments to stand guarantor for such projects. There is also increasing recourse to letters of
comfort, having the character of government guarantee. The element of risk associated with such
guarantees, transparency with regard to the guarantee policies and present magnitude of
guarantees extended by the State governments have raised concerns regarding the optimal or
sustainable level of such guarantees.  In absolute terms, the outstanding guarantees increased
from Rs.40,318 crore in March 1992 to Rs. 79,625 crore in September 1998 representing an
annual  compound growth of 12.0 per cent.   The growth in guarantees particularly since 1995
have been significant, the annual growth rate between March 1995 and September 1998 was
13.1 whereas the growth in debt during the same period was 7.5 per cent.   Guarantees accounted
for 30 per cent of consolidated fund of all States in March 1996 and 46 per cent of revenue
receipts in March 1997.
In a meeting of the State finance secretaries with the Reserve Bank of India, on November 8,
1997, the issue of government guarantees was deliberated upon at length and the view taken was
that, in the interest of prudent financial management and the credibility of the guarantees issued,
there is a need for a policy on guarantees for each State government within certain national
parameters. The finance secretaries requested RBI to constitute a Technical Committee to
examine the issue of State government guarantees in all its aspects.  The Committee consisted of
finance secretaries from Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka , M aharashtra, Meghalaya,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.  Ministry of Finance, Government of India was also represented in
the Committee.  The Chief General Manager (CGM) of Internal Debt Management Cell of RBI
was the convenor.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
On the basis of the discussions in the meetings of Finance Secretaries, Terms of Reference
adopted by the Committee and  the broad issues addressed by of the Committee were as follows:
(a) Prescribing limit on guara
(b) 
(c) Honouring of guarantees;
Ensuring greater selectivity in calling for and  providing of guarantees;
ntees- the basis and parameters therefor;
CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE
on State Government Guarantees
Report of the Technical Committee2
(d) Disclosure and transparency in reporting guarantees including letters of comfort,
(e) 
(f) Guarantee fee and institution of Contingency Fund for guarantees.
The recommendations of the Committee are summarised below.
Ceiling on guarantees
In the interest of ensuring fiscal sustainability and ensuring more discrimination and selectivity
in the matter of taking and giving of guarantees, it will be desirable for State Governments to fix
a ceiling on guarantees and such a ceiling will have transparency, sanctity and operational
relevance only if legislated, as explicitly enabled in the Constitution of India. This is being
practised already in some States where an overall ceiling on  guarantees is legislated, and such
Parameters and basis for the ceiling on Guarantees
There could be four
(a) One approach is to link guarantees to a dynamic variable such as Net State Domestic
Product (NSDP). Total outstanding debt plus one-third of outstanding guarantees should not
exceed, say, 50 per cent of the NSDP. A modification of this parameter is suggested for
those States, where guarantees have been used to raise resources for infrastructure, so as to
give equal weight to guarantees and debt, for guarantees issued since 1994-95.
(b)The second approach is based on the argument that the NSDP is not a parameter that is
within the ambit of the budgetary management of the State governments and it is more
appropriate to link guarantees to revenue receipts.  Refining this approach further, each State
Government could work out the flexible cash available with it each year after deducting the
obligatory expenditure such as salary, pension, amortisation and interest payments from the
Central tax devolution, States own tax revenues and non tax revenues. Depending on the
maturity pattern and nature of the loans guaranteed and using the same equation of debt to
guarantee as under the first parameter, the likely outflows on account of  guarantees, letter of
comfort, tripartite payment agreements, escrow accounts etc., could be worked out and then
related to the coverage available against the flexible cash flow. A coverage of 10 : 1 should
be maintained over the period of the loans/guarantee. The net present value concept could be
incorporated in this approach.
(c) The third  approach is to link the guarantees and debt to the consolidated fund itself.
Thus, the parameter would be that guarantees plus debt together do not exceed twice the
receipts in the consolidated fund.
(d) The fourth approach is to ensure that the ratio of incremental guarantees to incremental
net market borrowings is kept constant or brought down.
 parameters that could be used for fixing the ceiling on guarantees.
ceilings are changed by legislative amendments.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Standardisation of documentation; and
structured payment arrangements, escrow and direct debit mechanisms;3
There should be sufficient flexibility to each State Government to choose the most appropriate
parameter  while ensuring  transparency in respect of all the parameters. While each state may
legislate on the ceiling on guarantees, it should have the freedom to choose any of the
parameters listed above to serve as the basis for fixing the ceiling.  Simultaneously, there is
advantage in reporting to the legislature the extant position in terms of each of the four
The proposal for prescribing a ceiling on guarantees is practical only if there is more selectivity
in the calling for and in providing of guarantees. Such selectivity can be practised, inter alia , in
(a) Each State may lay down the procedures to be followed in case of projects or units where
State guarantee is involved, identifying a nodal officer in the Finance department, who could
co-ordinate the proposals involving guarantees. It will also be in the interest of banks and
financial institutions to involve the Finance Departments in any financial arrangement
(b) Some degree of risk sharing between the lenders/investors, borrowers and State
Government is desirable in the interest of ensuring efficient utilisation of funds and financial
discipline. Instead of State Governments providing guarantee for 100 per cent of the
loan/bond, guarantee could be restricted to 75 per cent to start with and adjusted suitably
depending upon the project with the concurrence of the investor/lender.
(c) States may give immediate attention to finalisation of the audited accounts of State public
sector enterprises in order to minimise the cases where guarantees are required.
(d) Where State level housing and urban development agencies do not have clear title for the
immovable properties owned /held by them, the States could explore the possibility of
creating a deed of transfer similar to that executed by the Government of  Nadu , to
obviate the need for guarantees especially in favour of Housing and Urban Development
Corporation (HUDCO) and Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) for housing loans and
for loans to develop urban property especially for commercial purposes.
(e) In the interest of ensuring better selectivity in the matter of giving guarantees, National
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) ,  the finance and the co-operation
department of the State Government should together formulate a plan based on historical
default at various levels, to minimise the need for provision of guarantees. The possibility of
introducing a system of ‘risk sharing’ between the State Government, NABARD and the co-
operative bank could also be considered.
(f) Amendment to the National Co-operative Development Corporation (NCDC) Act,
removing the mandatory requirement of guarantee, may be expedited. In sanctioning loans,
NCDC could be governed more by the viability of the project assisted and the financial
Tamil
involving the provision of guarantee by State Governments.
the following ways:
Selectivity in calling for and providing of guarantees
parameters.4
position of the co-operative assisted so that the need for guarantee is automatically obviated.
As in the case of NABARD, introduction of a system of risk sharing could be thought of.
(g) The reasons for asking for guarantee could be given in writing by the banks and financial
institutions to the Finance Secretary, who could either justify the intrinsic viability or take
(h) Even for non-commercial projects requiring guarantees, States will need to evolve
arrangements for increasing the stake in such projects by each of the stake holders viz., the
( i) In case of infrastructure projects there could be greater selectivity in the matter of calling
for and providing of guarantees. Where guarantees are given for infrastructure projects, there
should be some accountability for implementation and milestones could be drawn up for
monitoring. The availability of guarantee must not lead to a feeling that the bonds/
(j) At present, once guarantees are given, there is no review as to whether they need to be
in concurrence with financing agencies/rating agencies/trustee on behalf of bond holders as
and when the projects achieve viability.   To reach this objective, milestones could be
specified for each project which could be monitored; on reaching the milestone, the
reduced .
Honouring of guarantees
It is in the interest of State Governments to ensure that  all guarantees in respect of loans and
bonds are immediately honoured whenever there is default. The manner in which the States
handle the issue of default in honouring of guarantees will play a very important role in ensuring
the success of their market borrowing programme.  If necessary, as has been done by some
States, RBI could be authorised to earmark or pre-empt a portion of the new loans towards the
arrears in payment of interest and principal on loans and bonds. Alternatively, special bonds
could be issued to banks and financial institutions in lieu of the accumulated arrears of payment
due from State governments under invoked guarantees.  Each bond issued could be limited to the
specific amount of guarantees invoked by the bank/financial institution concerned, based on
market- related interest rate so that such bonds could be also traded in the secondary market.
Both these measures should be viewed as exceptional one time measures so as to avoid moral
hazard.
Letter of Comfort
As there is an implicit liability arising out of a letter of comfort and there is a need to contain
contingent liabilities devolving upon it, State government may eschew the practice of providing
letters of comforts and where letter of comfort from State government is required, credit
enhancement may be provided through explicit guarantees within the overall limit fixed for the
purpose. As regards letters of comfort provided in past, full details may be disclosed in the
budget documents and may be included in reckoning the ceiling on guarantees.
guarantee could be phased out or extent of risk covered by the guarantee 
continued if the project has attained viability. States could consider phasing out of guarantees
borrowings backed by such guarantee do not have to be serviced by the project itself.
beneficiaries, the Government and the financial institutions.
steps to improve the viability.5
Disclosure  transparency and reporting of guarantees
Comprehensive information on guarantees as also letters of comfort wherever issued should be
disclosed by the State governments in the major budget document i.e., Budget at a Glance on as
contemporaneous a basis as possible .
The proposal for ceiling on guarantees using whichever parameter the State government feels is
appropriate for it, should be brought to the legislature before the next year’s budget formulation
Automatic debit mechanisms
Mechanisms providing for automatic debit of State Government accounts run the risk of there
being insufficient funds relative to such pre-emption and minimum obligatory payments such as
salaries, pensions, amortisation and interest payments. Reservations have also been expressed to
such arrangements on other grounds as well. Debit amounting to expenditure has to be
authorised by State legislature in its budget and such automatic debits being uncertain cannot be
specifically authorised. Recourse to automatic debit mechanisms should therefore be subjected
to great circumspection.
Tripartite Structured Payment Arrangements
Structured payment arrangements  provide mechanisms for assured payment by State
Governments even where there is no guarantee whereas under guarantees issued by the State
governments there is no such mechanism. Such arrangements should be discouraged as the
financing decision is then not based on the intrinsic viability of the project but the availability of
such assured payment arrangement. Simultaneous with prescribing a ceiling on guarantees and
ensuring selectivity in issuing guarantees, such structured payments should be included in the
Escrow mechanisms for Independent Power Projects ( IPPs)
State governments should encourage the State Electricity Boards to build up a risk fund to
handle the contingent liability on account of exchange risk under escrow account arrangements
provided to IPPs. Along with disclosure of guarantees, States should also disclose the 
liabilities of the State Electricity Boards under 
Standardisation of documentation
Standardisation of guarantee documents though desirable would be difficult. Each State
Normally, the guarantee fee should be so structured that the receipts from such fees will take
care of the devolvement. Guarantee fees should  be invariably charged, appropriately calculated
and properly accounted for. The charging of guarantee fee should be rationalised and each State
should set up a contingency fund or make some provision for discharging the devolvement under
guarantees. The fees collected should be credited to the fund set up for the purpose.
Guarantee fee and constitution of a Contingency Fund for guarantees
government could, however, evolve its own standard documentation for guarantees.
IPPs or similar arrangements for other utilities.
revalued
guarantees reported and subject to the limits fixed by the States.
exercise say, by September, so that the ceiling can be debated and legislated upon.6
Monitoring of Guarantees
As part of exercises leading to budget, Committee recommends that guarantees given by State
governments may be made a regular item of discussion during the annual plan discussion,
In line with the trend towards consolidated presentation of accounts, the Committee recommends
that a summary of the financial statements of 100 per cent State-owned corporations may form
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 1998-99/1152
part of the notes relating to budgets of the State governments.
Implicit Contingent Liabilities
specifically at the stage of resource mobilisation exercise.