RBI announces revamping of the
Schemes of Export Credit in Foreign Currency
at Internationally Competitive Rates
February 28, 1999
In order to make available export credit at pre-shipment and post-shipment stages at
internationally competitive rates, the Reserve Bank of India has announced major simplification and
revamping of the Schemes of Export Credit in Foreign Currency for exporters. As per the existing
instructions, interest to be charged for export credit under the scheme will be directly related to London
Inter bank Offered Rate (LIBOR).  Interest rate to be charged by Indian banks over LIBOR for such
credits will not exceed 1.5 per cent. On fresh transactions, banks may also use Euro Libor/Euribor,
wherever applicable, as the benchmark for the purpose of determining the applicable interest rate.
Export credit in foreign currency may be extended in US Dollar, Euro, Pound Sterling and Japanese
Yen.  Under the scheme, export credit is expected to be made available to exporters, without any
exchange risk and at rates which are internationally competitive.
2. The highlights of the revamped schemes of Export Credit in Foreign Currency at internationally
competitive rates, are :
(a) Assessment of export credit limits would be ‘need based’ and not directly related to the availability
of collateral security.  As long as the requirement of credit limit is   justified on the basis of exporter’s
performance and track record, the same would not be denied merely on the grounds of non-availability
of collateral security.
(b) In case of established exporters having satisfactory track record, banks would consider sanctioning
‘Line of Credit’ for a longer period, say, three years with in-built flexibility to step-up/step-down the
quantum of limits within the over-all  outer limits assessed.  The step-up limits would become operative
on attainment of pre-determined performance parameters by the exporters.  Banks would obtain security
documents covering the outer limit sanctioned to the exporters for such  longer period.
(c) Banks would not insist on submission of export order or Letter of Credit (LC)  for every
disbursement of pre-shipment credit from exporters with consistently   good track-record.  Instead, a
system of periodical submission of a Statement of  LCs or export orders in hand, would be introduced.
(d) Banks would adopt any of the methods, viz., Projected Balance Sheet Method, Turnover Method or
Cash Budget Method for assessing working capital facilities to exporter-customers which is most
suitable and appropriate for exporters.
(e) In the case of consortium finance, once the consortium has approved the      assessment, member
banks would simultaneously initiate their respective sanctioning    process.
(f) Submission of original sale contract/confirmed order/proforma invoice, need not be insisted upon by
banks at the time of handling the export documents unless required per LC terms.
3. Banks have also been advised to simplify their internal procedures, e.g., putting in place a facilitation
mechanism for assisting exporter-customers for quick initial scrutiny of credit applications, delegation
of higher sanctioning powers for export credit, reducing the intervening layers in the sanction process,
bringing out handbook containing salient features of the simplified scheme for the benefit of exporters
and organising periodic exporters meet.
4. A detailed circular giving effect to the above revamped scheme has been issued by the Reserve Bank
to the banks on February 28, 1999.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/1110