for
August 6, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has today published the report on ,
Securities Market. Copies of the report are been circulated among market participants, such as,
There has been continuing demand from the market participants to widen the scope of repo
Committee on Government Securities Market had suggested that a Technical Paper be prepared
A sub-group was accordingly constituted with Dr. Ajay Shah, Assistant Professor of Indira
of Government and Bank Accounts, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Shri K.D.Zacharias, Joint
Debt Management Cell as Convenor of the Group.
www.rbi.org.in
th
Reserve Bank of India, 16
Central Office, S.B.Marg, Fort,
Mumbai 400 001
Fax No. 022-2659610/022-2662105
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1999-2000/187
rbiidm@bom3.vsnl.net.in
E-mail : 
 Floor,
Internal Debt Management Cell,
The Chief General Manager,
participants may send their comments to:
). Market The report is also made available on the Reserve Bank website (URL: 
President, National Stock Exchange as members and Dr.T.C.Nair, General Manager, Internal
Director, ABN Amro Bank Securities (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Ms. Chitra Ramakrishna, Senior Vice
Legal Adviser, Legal Department, Reserve Bank of India, Shri Vishnu Deuskar, Managing
National Securities Depository Ltd, (NSDL), Shri K.Venkatappa, General Manager, Department
Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR), Shri C.B. Bhave, Managing Director,
prudential policy.
accounting, risks and its implications for reserve requirements laid down as part of monetary or
covering all aspects of repos comprising legal status, regulatory framework, stadardisation of
Government securities market, in particular. Against this background the Technical Advisory
transactions with a view to increasing the depth and liquidity in the debt market in general and in
(FIMMDA) for obtaining their views.
primary dealers, satellite dealers and the Fixed Income and Money Market Dealers Association
prepared by the sub-group of the erstwhile Technical Advisory Committee on Government
'Repurchase Agreements (Repos)'
Market Feedback
Report on Repurchase Agreements Reserve Bank releases 