Formation of Senior Bankers Committee
For financing of Enterprises based on Output of
R& D and Industrial Research Organisations
August 25, 1999
to ;
 
in small and medium industries sectors.
 
 
other related matter considered necessary by the Committee.
 
 Shri P.N. Venkatachalam, Deputy Managing Director & Chief Credit Office, State
 
 Shri P.S.Shenoy, Executive Director, Bank of Baroda.
 
ICICI.
The Committee will also seek the benefit of the advice of Dr.R.A.Mashelkar, Director
December 15, 1999.
Press Release : 1999-2000/296
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
The Report of the Committee will be submitted to the Governor, Reserve Bank of India by
industries and venture capital organisations as considered necessary.
The Committee will interact with various research and development bodies, associations of
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. General, 
Dr. Ashok Ganguli, Chairman of ICI Ltd. will be special invitee to this Committee.
provide by Convener of the Bankers Committee and the Secretariat to the Committee will be 
Smt. Lalita Gupte, Joint Managing Director and Chief Operating Officer of ICICI will be the
Shri V.G.Damle, Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India (v)
(iv)
Shri V.H. Ramakrishanan, General Manager, Bank of India. (iii)
Bank of India
(ii)
Shri V.P.Singh, Executive Director, Industrial Development Bank of India (i)
The Committee will comprise:
look into issues relating to supervision, regulation, resource mobilisation and any (iii)
promotion of venture capital industry for this purpose, and
commercial exploitation of various research and development products and for
suggest measures for facilitating the financing by banks/financial institutions for (ii)
the country and the existing arrangements for financing such enterprises particularly
take stock of the present status of the Research and Development based enterprises in (i)
The terms of reference of the Committee are 
development particularly in areas of new technology by banks and financial institutions.
commercial production of products and services based on industrial research and
India to examine the ways to strengthen the financing of enterprises which seek to undertake
Ltd. (ICICI), State Bank of India, Bank of India, Bank of Baroda and the Reserve Bank of
Industrial Development Bank of India, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
The Reserve Bank of India has decided to set up a senior bankers committee drawn from