RBI sets up Working Group on Discounting of Bills by Banks
banks to examine the possibility of extending bill discounting facility to services sector.
possibility of extending bills discounting facility to this sector.
Shri K.R. 
Chief General Manager (Credit),
National Banking Group,
Financial Institutions Group,
Monetary Policy Department,
Shri J.B. Mhatre,
& Development,
Department of Banking Supervision,
Deputy General Manager,
Member Shri R.M. Thakkar,
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Banking Operations
Deputy General Manager,
Member
Reserve Bank of India
Adviser
Member Dr. G.S.Bhati
ANZ Grindlays Bank
Director and Head of
Member Ms. Anuradha Nadkarni
State Bank of India
Member Harbans Lal, Shri 
Vysya Bank Chairman 
Chairman Ramamoorthy,
Name
The composition of the Working Group is:
and software services, travel, tourism etc., it is considered necessary to examine the
importance of the services sector especially industries such as, information technology
prohibited from discounting bills covering services. But, in the context of the growing
securities are not eligible for discounting by banks. Further, in general, banks are
electricity charges, customs duty, hire purchase/lease rental instalments and sale of
material/inventory for production purposes and sale of goods. Bills covering payment of
At present, banks are allowed to discount only bills covering purchase of raw
The Reserve Bank of India has constituted a Working Group on Discounting of Bills by
December 3, 1999Director,
Shri K. 
Monetary Policy Department,
Shri S.D. 
Industrial & Export Credit Department,
to :
 
 
 
 suggest any necessary changes in the existing legal/regulatory frame work that
 suggest any other issue relevant/incidental to the subject which the Group
Release : 1999-2000/739
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
meeting.
The Working Group shall submit its report within a period of two months after its first
considers necessary.
(v)
may be needed.
(iv)
introduction of "Bankers Acceptance" facility.
put in place before extending Bills discounting to new areas like services and
examine all critical and relevant issues including the necessary safeguards to be (iii)
examine the role and scope for introducing "Bankers' Acceptance" facility. (ii)
credit opened by banks.
trade and services sectors, including discounting of Trade Bills against letters of
Discounting mechanism as an instrument for facilitating financing in particular
examine the feasibility and suggest measures to strengthen the existing Bills (i)
The terms of reference of the Working Group are 
Reserve Bank of India
Secretary Deputy General Manger,
Member Sapkal
Reserve Bank of India
Secretary Deputy General Manager,
Member Chandrachoodan,
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Economic Analysis and Policy
Member Shri T.S. Sohal,
Reserve Bank of India