November 16, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has issued guidelines to the banks for issuing of debit cards and smart
cards. With the spread of information technology, electronic money, namely, debit cards and
smart cards are being increasingly used as alternative payment instruments.  These guidelines
have been issued with a view to helping banks to introduce appropriate schemes in issuing of
Debit cards are plastic cards connected with electro magnetic identification.  Banks issue such
cards to customers who could use them to pay for their purchases at specified points of sale
terminals. Thus the cards facilitate the customers to effect the transactions on their own accounts
remotely. Smart card, on the other hand, has an integrated circuit with micro processor chip
embedded in it so that it could perform calculations, maintain records, act as an electronic purse.
The cards can either be exhaustible or rechargeable. In either case, they have built-in memory
and processor along with an operating system which performs the financial operations.  The
As per the RBI guidelines, banks can introduce smart/debit cards with the approval of their
boards subject to the compliance of the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank. The guidelines
issued include criteria on the eligibility of customers to whom the cards can be issued, payment
of interest on the balances transferred to the smart/debit cards, treatment of liability in respect of
outstanding/unspent balances on the smart/debit cards, security aspects and other terms and
conditions for issue of these cards by the banks.  Although banks need not obtain prior approval
of the Reserve Bank, the card issuing banks should review the operations of smart/debit cards on
Press Release : 656/1999-2000
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
The detailed guidelines are available on the RBI website at (www.rbi.org.in).
a half yearly basis.
cards have built-in facility for protection against fraudulent operations.
electronic cards to ease pressure on physical cash.
RBI issues guideline on Debit / Smart Cards