PRESS RELEASE
Mid-Term Review of Monetary and
• Developments in macro-economic, monetary and price situations are
favourable.
• Credit Policy to support industrial growth with price stability.
• Sufficient liquidity to be made available for growth.
• CRR cut by one percentage point. This will release additional 
• Incremental CRR of 10 per cent on FCNR (B) deposits withdrawn. This
will release 
• Interest rate surcharge of 30 per cent on import finance withdrawn.
• The minimum interest rate of 20 per cent on overdue export bills
withdrawn.
• Emphasis upon simplification of procedures and cutting delays for
FDI and improving credit delivery to exporters and other important
• 
• New measures for Deposit Insurance and valuation of securities under
consideration.
• Special facilities for 
Dr.Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, in a meeting with the Chief
Executives of banks today presented the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit
Policy 1999-2000. In his Statement, Governor reviewed the macro-economic
conditions and spelt out that the stance of monetary policy for the second half of
1999-2000 would remain broadly the same as in the first half. He also announced a
number of policy measures towards improving liquidity and credit delivery and for
overnor said that assuming that the recovery in industrial production
witnessed in the first half of the year would gather further momentum during the rest
of the year, and there was no unexpected setback on the agricultural front, growth in
 in the current year was likely to be in the range of 6 to 6.5 per cent consistent
Governor felt that allowing for some increase in prices due to seasonal factors
later in the year and adjustment lags in administered prices, the inflation rate for the
current year as a whole was likely to be less than 4.8 per cent in the previous year. He
further added that the high level of food stocks combined with low rate of inflation
3.GDP2.NRIs/,060 lendable resources of ,000 
with the range of 6 to 7 per cent, indicated in his April Statement.
G
Domestic Developments
further development of financial markets.
Y2K preparations.
Further Measures to develop Money Market.
sectors.
crore. Rs.1
crore. Rs.7 resources of 
lendable
Credit Policy 1999-2000
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
October 29, 19992
should provide greater manoeuvrability in managing the economy in the event of any
Referring to the trends in monetary aggregates, which in the current year are
marked by subdued growth, Governor said that in the light of the real sector trends
and the expected inflation outlook, the projected order of monetary expansion of 15.5
Governor felt that any possible expansion in currency in circulation till
December/ January 1999-2000 in the context of the millennium change was expected
year end.
While mentioning that the domestic and international developments so far had
allowed the Reserve Bank to keep liquidity in the system at a comfortable level
without much expansion in reserve money, Governor observed that as per current
expectations, it appeared that with some appropriate adjustments there should be no
difficulty in meeting fully the liquidity needs of different sectors. He also drew
attention to the significant pick up in the bank credit and other flows to the
Referring to the RBI’s strategy of combining auction issues with acceptance
by private placement of dated securities of the Government consistent with market
conditions and the release of such securities through open market sales, Governor said
that the strategy had helped to contain the volatility in securities prices and reduce the
associated risks to major participants like banks and primary dealers. 
however, mentioned that while the RBI’s policy had proved to be highly effective in
keeping interest rates relatively stable, an issue that needed to be considered was
whether it was a desirable policy of debt management from the long term point of
view .As the secondary market develops and turnover increases, he said it should be
possible to exclusively rely on auctions to sell Government paper and that was the
direction in which RBI would like to move. Governor further mentioned that an
important requirement for the secondary market in government securities to develop
was for Government’s net borrowing requirements to be sustainable. In the interest of
maintaining stable interest rate environment, Government’s borrowing 
needed to be kept within reasonable limits. This would also reinforce the process of
recovery in industrial sector and enable banks to adequately meet the demand for non-
In the context of monetary management, Govern or stated that a critical factor
was the fiscal outlook for the rest of the year. Governor stressed the need for
determined action to increase revenues, reduce deficits in the public sector, and
reduce expenditure through appropriate policy actions. As recently announced by the
Government, he mentioned that it was imperative that necessary actions to correct
fiscal distortions are taken as early as possible. He mentioned that fiscal 
were no longer a matter of domestic concern alone as all over the world, international
agencies and investors kept a close watch on emerging trends in Government
8.programme7.6.5.4.
External Developments
finances, as they had a bearing on future macro-economic stability.
slippages
food bank credit.
Governor,
commercial sector from the banking system during the current year.
to reverse to normal before the 
– 16.0 per cent indicated in the April Statement, appeared reasonable.
unexpected shocks.3
The two-year period since September 1997 presented major challe nges for the
management of the external sector, when the country had to cope with global effects
of a series of intense crises in East Asia , Russia and Brazil, continued uncertainties in
industrial economies like Japan and other unfavourable external developments after
the Pokhran Test. Stating that while there were signs of an upturn in the world
economy in the last six months, Governor said that the external situation continued to
be characterised by several uncertainties as the management of the external sector in
the first half of the current year also had to cope with some uncertainties in
investment outlook consequent upon dissolution of the Lok Sabha in April 1999 and
Governor felt that viewed against the backgroun d of external and domestic
uncertainties, developments in respect of both the exchange rate of the rupee as well
as movement in foreign exchange reserves have been reasonably satisfactory.
Governor stated that foreign exchange reserves at US $ 33.07 billion substantially
exceed the total stock of short-term debt and portfolio flows. Emphasising that as a
matter of conscious policy, India would continue to keep its short-term as well as
forward liabilities at a manageable level in relation to the size of its reserves,
Governor mentioned that the primary objective of the Reserve Bank in regard to the
management of the exchange rate was to maintain orderly conditions in the foreign
exchange market, to meet temporary supply-demand gaps which might arise due to
uncertainties or other reasons and to curb  and self-fulfilling speculative
Governor observed that there was some evidence of pick up in exports during
the first five months of current year when exports grew by 4.6 per cent in dollar terms
and it was necessary that the momentum was kept up. Governor said that despite the
effect of increase in oil prices, the expectation is that the current account deficit in
1999-2000 would still be below 2 per cent of GDP, in view of encouraging
developments in respect of invisibles, particularly private remittances and software
exports.
In order to improve the delivery of export credit, Governor informed that the
Reserve Bank had set up a Bankers’ Group at the operational level (comprising senior
officials from commercial banks and the Reserve Bank). So far, the Group has held 22
meetings with Chief Executives of major banks and also held parallel interactive
sessions with the exporters in 14 major export centers. The experience seems to have
Observing that an important priority of the Government and the Reserve Bank
of India was to create an environment which was favourable to investment and
strengthening of financial links with the non-resident Indian community abroad,
Governor announced provision of following further facilities to NRIs without the
Bank :
 Authorised Dealers may grant rupee loans and overdrafts in India to 
against the security of shares/securities/ debentures or immovable properties
 13.12.11.10.9.
 
held by such persons in India for purposes other than investment.
NRIs (i)
need for approval of the Reserve 
proved useful in improving the credit delivery to exporters.
activities.
destabilising
the ensuing electoral process.4
 General permission to Indian companies for issuing non-convertible
NRIs/ OCBs on repatriation basis.
 To delegate the powers to Authorised Dealers to permit portfolio investment
NRIs/ PIOs/
With simplification of procedures for foreign direct investment, Governor
mentioned that in respect of all cases of foreign direct investments, which were in line
Second Half of 1999-2000
Recalling April Statement that “the current stance of monetary poli cy will
continue to be in the direction of facilitating adequate availability of liquidity along
with stable medium and long-term interest rates, with policy preference for softening
to the extent circumstances permit. ” , Governor said that during this year so far, while
liquidity conditions have been on the whole comfortable and medium and long-term
rates have tended to soften, there has been some pressure at the shorter end of the
yield curve. He mentioned that in order to cool down the pressures on call money
market, during first half of October, the Reserve Bank opened a purchase window for
Treasury bills as part of its open market operations and that it was the intention of
RBI to continue with that practice as and when considered necessary and, over time,
to develop a two-way market operations in Treasury bills. He further mentioned that
in due course, with further development of Treasury bills market, such action should
enable RBI to confine its activities to secondary market operations in Treasury bills,
While agreeing that in view of the decline in inflation rates in the past few
months, and a relatively  outlook for the year as a whole, there was a case
for a further downward movement in the structure of interest rates, he stressed that
prime lending rates of banks for commercial credit was entirely within the purview of
the banks and as such the decisions in regard to interest rates have to be taken by
banks themselves in the light of various factors, including their own cost of funds,
He added that while greater flexibility in interest rates was a most desirable
objective, it had to be  that banks faced several structural and other
constraints such as high levels of cost of funds and non-interest operating expenses,
overhang of NPAs and interest tax which contributed to high lending rates. Interest
rates on contractual savings like Provident Fund, national Savings Scheme 
higher than long-term deposit rates of banks. High levels of Government borrowing
also gave an upward bias to interest rate structure. High level of CRR also raised the
 felt that from the short-term and long-term points of view, in the context of
financial sector deregulation and industrial liberalisation, priority needed to be given
to removing some of these constraints so that the interest rate structure could be made
18.17.16.15.14.(iii)
more flexible during different phases of the business cycle.
He
average cost of funds for banks.
were
recognised
their transaction costs, and interest rates ruling in the non-banking sector, etc.
favourable
devolvement in primary auctions. obviating the need for any 
Stance of Monetary Policy for the
with Government Policy, case-by-case approval of RBI was no longer required.
 
OCBs in shares/debentures. by 
debentures by way of public issue to 
(ii)5
Referring to the measures taken during this year to regulate liquidity,
Governor said that the medium/long-term objective of monetary policy would
continue to be in reducing the average level of CRR, while in the short-term it could
Governor said that apart from price stability, central banks all over the world
also accorded importance to financial stability as a policy objective. The Reserve
Bank has been making continuous efforts towards strengthening financial soundness
by prescribing capital adequacy norms of banks and financial institutions, advising
improvements in asset classification and accounting systems and establishing best
practice norms for income recognition and provisioning against exposures faced by
them. While sustained reforms have significantly improved the outlook in respect of
overall financial sector stability in India, RBI would continue to review the position
The Bank’s overall stance of policy for 1999-2000, the Governor said would
be : “provision of reasonable liquidity; stable interest rates with preference
for softening to the extent possible within the existing operational and structural
constraints; orderly development of financial markets and ensuring financial
In the light of the macro-economic and monetary policy developments,
 The Cash Reserve Ratio ( CRR) maintained by the scheduled commercial
banks reduced by one percentage point from the present level of 10 per cent to
9 per cent in two instalments, effective the fortnights beginning November 6,
1999 and November 20, 1999 increasing the lendable resources of banks by
Rs.7
 In order to improve the cash management by banks, as a measure of
simplification, it has been decided to introduce a lag of two weeks in the
maintenance of stipulated CRR by banks effective from the fortnight
 The interest rate surcharge of 30 per cent on import finance, is being
withdrawn with immediate effect. This will reduce the financing cost of
 The stipulation of a minimum rate of 20 per cent interest on overdue export
 In line with the policy of minimising the country’s short-term external
borrowing liabilities, the minimum maturity for FCNR (B) deposits is being
raised to one year from six months. Banks, however, will continue to have the
(iii),000 22.Financial Sector Reforms and21.issues integral to the maintenance of financial stability in the future.20.19.
(v)
bills is also being withdrawn.
(iv)
imports for industrial production and investment.
 
beginning November 6, 1999.
(ii)
 
crore.
(i)
Monetary and Credit Policy Measures
policy : Governor announced the following changes in 
Monetary Policy Measures
stability”.
continue to 
with regard to the 
behaviour of monetary indicators. be varied in both directions depending on the 6
freedom to offer floating rate deposits (with maturity of one year or more and
with interest reset period of six months). At the same time, the requirement by
banks to maintain an incremental CRR of 10 per cent on increase in liabilities
under (B) Scheme is being withdrawn, effective from the fortnight
beginning November 6, 1999. This will increase the lendable resources of
Rs1
The following modifications/measures for further development of money
 The permission given to non-bank entities to lend in the call/notice money
market by routing their call/notice money market operations through primary
upto end-June 2000.
 MMMFs exclusively investing in money market instruments will henceforth
SEBI Regulations.
 For operational convenience, it has been decided to henceforth allow 
 It has been decided to permit scheduled commercial banks to offer ‘
writing’ facility to Gilt Funds and to those Liquid Income schemes of mutual
 Cheque writing’ facility extended to Gilt Funds and to those Liquid Income
schemes of mutual funds which predominantly invest in money market
MMMFs.
 With a view to providing further flexibility in the use of FRAs/IRS, it has been
decided to permit mutual funds, in addition to corporates, to undertake
 With a view to facilitating flow of information and transparency in the
functioning of money markets, Reserve Bank proposes to work out in
consultation with market participants, modalities of releasing on a daily basis,
data on volume and rates in call money market as well as some other relevant
On the basis of announcements made in the April policy, several measures
have been taken with the objective of improving depth and liquidity in the
government securities market . The following action is in progress to further
• In regard to developing the retail market segment, a Working Group is
being constituted to 
24.funds which predominantly invest in money market instruments.(iii)23.,060 
analyse all related aspects.
strengthen the development of the market.
Government Securities Market
data.
(vii)
FRAs/IRS for the purpose of hedging their own balance sheet risks.
(vi)
instruments, subject to the same safeguards prescribed for 
‘ (v)
cheque (iv)
to be set up as a separate entity in the form of a ‘Trust’ only.
MMMFs
come within the purview of 
(ii)
dealers extended 
(i)
market are being introduced:
Money Market
crore. banks by 
FCNR7
• An Internal Working Group has been constituted to go into various aspects
• Arrangements relating to clearing corporation are under consideration
which will pave way for opening the repo market with essential safeguards
to PSU bonds and bonds of FIs held in demat form in depositories and
traded in recognised stock exchanges. It has been decided to publicise gilt
• It has been decided to advise PDs that they should have self-imposed
Keeping in view the suggestions received from banks and other market
participants, the existing PLR norms have been further reviewed and it has been
decided that banks will be given the freedom to charge interest rates without reference
to 
• Loans covered by refinancing schemes of term lending institutions.
• 
• 
• NRE/
As further steps in the direction of strengthening prudential norms, the
 In view of the growing share of investments in the assets of banks, the
risk weight of 2.5 per cent for the risk arising out of market price
variations is being extended to cover all investments including
securities outside the SLR. This, however, will take effect from the
 With a view to moving closer to the international standard of 15 per
cent, it has been decided to lower the exposure ceiling in respect of an
individual borrower from the present level of 25 per cent to 20 per
cent of the bank's capital funds effective April 1, 2000. Banks are
given two year period for adjustment, where the existing level of
An Informal Group on Valuation of Banks’ Investments Portfolio, set up by
the Reserve Bank has recently submitted its report recommending new norms for
valuation of approved securities. The Group’s report will be circulated among banks
and also placed before the Board for Financial Supervision for advice and thereafter a
final decision will be taken on the procedure for valuation of investments with effect
27.26.FCNR deposits.Advances/Overdraft against domestic/.25
from April 1, 2000.
Valuation of Investments
exposure is more than 20 per cent.
(ii)
year ending March 31, 2001.
(i)
following measures are announced:
Prudential Norms
Discounting of bills.
Lending to intermediary agencies.
categories : PLR, in respect of the following 
Prime Lending Rates
Review of Norms Relating to
reasonable leverage ratios with the consent of their Board of Directors.
instruments through informative pamphlets.
relating to two-way operations by RBI in the Treasury Bills market.8
At present, banks are required to allocate towards housing finance to the
extent of 3 per cent of incremental deposits. With a view to providing more flexibility
to banks to increase the flow of credit, directly and indirectly through intermediary
agencies including Housing and Urban Development Corporation and National
Housing Bank, certain changes in the norms for determining the housing finance
Banks and financial institutions have been entrusted with special
responsibilities for providing credit on reasonable terms to certain sectors,
particularly, agriculture, exports, micro-credit institutions, small-scale industries and
housing. The Reserve Bank has held review meetings with the Chief Executives of
banks to ensure that simplified procedures are actually being implemented at the
ground level. It is proposed to hold such review meetings at regular intervals, and to
encourage banks to set up internal systems to ensure effective implementation of
Another area where banks and financial institutions can play an important role
is that of infrastructure financing. After extensive consultation, RBI introduced in
April, 1999 new guidelines to accelerate credit disbursement in infrastructure. It is
proposed to review the operation of these new guidelines after one year of operation
(i.e., May, 2000), and make such changes as may be required to promote further
As announced in the April statement, RBI has set up a special Micro Credit
Cell to review the ground realities and in consultation with NABARD and reputed
micro-credit institutions, suggest measures to remove any remaining policy and
procedural bottlenecks for “mainstreaming micro credit”. The objective is to
accelerate the flow of bank credit to micro finance institutions without jeopardizing
their decentralised, voluntary and non-bureaucratic character. A high level Task Force
on Supportive Policy and Regulatory Framework for Micro Finance set up by
NABARD has also recently submitted its report to NABARD. The recommendations
made by the Task force are being processed by NABARD in consultation with RBI
Non-Banking Financial Companies (
RBI has been keen to promote the concept of Self Regulatory Organisation
among NBFCs. The Bank proposes to introduce formats of balance sheet with
adequate disclosures as recommended by a Committee constituted by the Bank after
getting views of the industry and Department of Company Affairs, Government of
Following measures in respect of NBFC sector are being notified with
 The borrowings from mutual funds presently come within the purview of
public deposits as described in the Direction on Acceptance of Public
33.32.31.30.29.28.
(i)
effect : immediate 
India.
NBFCs)
and Government as appropriate.
financing of infrastructure.
simplified procedures.
allocation by banks are being introduced.
Credit Delivery9
Deposits. It has been decided that borrowings from mutual funds would be
 NBFCs should give public notice of 3 months in leading newspapers
before they decide to close a branch or before effecting sale or transfer of
A Working Group was constituted in the RBI to rev iew the role of deposit
insurance in India. The Group has recommended changes in the existing system in
regard to coverage, institutions to be brought within the ambits of insurance,
Y2K) Preparations
Governor mentioned that all the 103 commercial banks and their 40
subsidiaries have confirmed Y2K readiness as at the end of August, 1999. The MICR
cheque clearance system at the Reserve Bank is being replaced by the state of the art
Y2K Compliant Systems in all the metropolitan centres. Besides, all the Issue Offices
of the Reserve Bank and currency chests at commercially important cities have been
asked to store adequate quantities of cash in order to meet any sudden increase in
In line with the international practices, all banks shall remain closed for public
To enable the banking system to tide over the century date change liquidity
measures :
Special Liquidity Support
 With a view to enabling the banks to meet any unanticipated additional
demand for liquidity in the context of the century date change, it has been
decided to introduce a ‘Special Liquidity Support’ for the period December 1,
1999 to January 31, 2000. Under the ‘Special Liquidity Support’, banks will
be eligible to avail of liquidity under Section 17(4)(a) of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 to the extent of their excess holdings of dated Government of
India Securities/Treasury Bills over the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (
required to be maintained. The rate of interest on this facility will be 2.5
Flexibility in the treatment of 
 To facilitate banks to tide over the contingency during the millennium change,
it has been decided to treat cash in hand maintained by the banks for
compliance of CRR for a limited period of two months commencing from
December 1,1999 to January 31,2000. It is clarified that the cash in 
which will be counted for CRR purposes, during the above period cannot be
SLR purposes simultaneously.
37.36.35.34.Deposit Insurance
treated as eligible asset for 
hand
(ii)
CRR
percentage points over the Bank Rate.
) SLR
(i)
needs, a contingency plan has been put in place including the following 
transactions on January 1, 2000.
demand.
Year 2000 (
regulatory systems, etc. The Report is being released for wider public discussion.
ownership.
(ii)
excluded from the definition of public deposits.10
 As already indicated, for operational convenience, the maintenance of CRR by
banks is being lagged by two weeks. With the leverage of two weeks
available, banks should not have any problem in complying with the CRR
requirement around the century date change. Any bank that expects a special
problem in meeting its CRR obligations at the end of the year can approach
Contingency Funding Line
 As per the extant stipulations, repayments of borrowings from abroad by
banks (i.e.,  dealers), is allowed only if they have no outstanding
borrowings either from the RBI or other bank/financial institution in India and
are clear of all money market borrowings for a period of at least four weeks
before the repayment. It has been decided to temporarily permit foreign banks
to bring in Head Office funds and repatriate such funds during the period of
two months from December 1, 1999 to January 31, 2000 without the above
Reserve Bank of India,
from Head Offices Abroad(iii)
October 29, 1999
Mumbai,
restriction.
authorised
(iv)
the RBI for appropriate relaxation/assistance.