January 14, 1999
Banks are at an advanced stage of implementing the Y2K compliance projects in accordance
with the remediation framework and compliance deadlines stipulated by the Reserve Bank of
India. 
of India and Shri Sudhir Srivastava, Director, Ministry of Finance, Government of India were
also present.
assessed as unsatisfactory after March 31, 1999 would invite penalties. He also stressed that the
should ensure adequate budgets for their year 2000 
necessary, will exhort the vendors to extend their cooperation to the banks. Shri Rama Krishna of
the Department of Electronics assured of the Department's full support to the banking sector's
The Reserve Bank of India attaches a great deal of importance to Year 2000 preparations of
rather than bimonthly.
public transactions. The periodicity of the Steering Committee's meetings would now be monthly
The RBI will also focus on its own contingency plans for the four MICR clearing centers and its
adequate cash in hand to manage the cash transactions in order to meet exigencies.
on December 29, 1999 to facilitate business continuity across the millennium change and to keep
As a contingency planning it was decided to keep a printout of all the balances in the branches as
operational areas where the customers could be directly affected by the disruption in the systems.
The Deputy Governor stated that banks should focus more on developing a contingency plan for
efforts in meeting the Y2K compliance deadlines.
specific experiences with the vendors in making their systems Y2K compliant. The RBI, if
also decided that the banks will, at the Indian Banks' Association level, meet to exchange their
private and foreign banks separately in February to assess each sector's Y2K preparations. It was
The Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve Bank of India will also meet the public sector,
programmes.
systems to rigorous testing and contingency planning. The Deputy Governor added that banks
focus of compliance efforts should now shift from upgradation, implementation of compliant
Governor, Shri S.P. Talwar pointed out that those banks whose Y2K compliance status is
Expressing his concern at the slow pace of the compliance, the Reserve Bank of India Deputy
2000 preparations. Shri Rama Krishna, Senior Director, Department of Electronics, Government
The Steering Committee met today to review the progress of banks and institutions in their year
Indian Banks' Association and representative of banks are other members of the Committee.
jurisdiction over institutions in the financial sector, National Institute for Bank Management,
Vasudevan and K. Ahmed), heads of the Reserve Bank's departments exercising supervisory
Reserve Bank Deputy Governor, Shri S.P. Talwar, two Executive Directors (S/Shri A.
The Committee is headed by directions it had, last year, set up a High Level Steering Committee. 
banks and institutions in the financial sector. To monitor Y2K preparations and to give strategic
This was noted by the High Level Steering Group on Y2K issues.
Non-Y2K compliant banks to face penaltiessuggested framework of Bank for International Settlements have been prescribed.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 1998-99/939
broad remediation framework and compliance deadlines patterned on the internationally
Y2K comprising both off-site monitoring through monthly reports and on-site verification. A
compliance of the internal systems. RBI has articulated a clear supervisory strategy in regard to
Y2K in respect of the supervised institutions. The Department of Technology looks after the
within the Department of Banking Supervision to spearhead the RBI's supervisory initiative on
through the high level Steering Group. A separate project cell has also been set up, in June 1998,
It may be mentioned that the RBI closely monitors the Y2K preparations of the financial sector