March 13, 1999
Background
circulars/directives issued by them and to examine the continued relevance of various returns
Constitution of the Regulation Review Authority
purpose, or which are no longer required in view of the changes that have taken place in
Bank and others involved.
Authority, it is intended to provide an opportunity to the public at large, to seek a review of the
Reserve Bank regulations/forms and procedures, in order to reduce unnecessary paperwork and
to make all concerned, focus on essentials rather than peripherals. The Authority has been set up
Purpose
The purpose of the Authority is to provide an opportunity to the public at large to question and
authority in any individual case.
It is clarified that the Authority is not a forum for grievance redressal against the decision of any
objective can be achieved in a much simpler and cost-effective way.
purposes, (b) they are cumbersome and time consuming, (c) they are duplicates and (d) the same
Reserve Bank on the grounds such as, (a) the regulations/circulars/forms do not serve their stated
seek deletion or modification, of any regulation, circular or return issued, or required by the
Review Authority.
Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India has been appointed as the Regulations
is reconstituted by the Reserve Bank.
for a period of one year from April 1, 1999, and will cease to exist from April 1, 2000, unless it
The Authority will be independent of any department of the Reserve Bank. Through this
Bank regulations effective and simple and to reduce unnecessary paper work by the Reserve
technology, regulatory framework or market development. The objective is to make the Reserve
unnecessary circulars, cumbersome procedures and forms which do not fulfil their stated
Authority" to seek suggestions from the public and various agencies for elimination of
As part of this review exercise, the Reserve Bank has decided to set up a "Regulations Review
has been made in eliminating outdated circulars, forms and returns, and also in simplifying them.
which are required to be furnished to them. As a result of such reviews, considerable progress
Reserve Bank. All departments of the Reserve Bank are expected to periodically review
various types of returns, either on a regular basis or while seeking a specific approval from the
Banks, financial institutions, market participants, firms and individuals are also required to file
regional offices of the Reserve Bank, market participants and, in some cases, the general public.
of India has issued a large number of circulars, directives, notifications, for compliance by banks,
control, regulation of some financial markets, issue of currency and coins etc., the Reserve Bank
and other financial entities, public debt management, issue of bonds to the public, exchange
In order to fulfil its responsibilities in diverse fields, such as, supervision and regulation of banks
RBI sets up a Regulations Review Authorityissues relating to overall macro-economics, financial or banking policies.
Who can Apply?
Anyone can apply to the Regulations Review Authority - a citizen, a non-resident Indian, an
decision has been taken by the Reserve Bank to change a particular regulation, circular, or form,
the existing regulation and practice will continue to be in force. All agencies/public are expected
What could an applicant seek?
The applicant may suggest a review of any regulation, rule, scheme, circular, advice, form to be
filled, or procedures prescribed by the Reserve Bank, in order to fulfil the purposes mentioned
employees, such as, staff regulations, provident fund and general regulations.
The applicant may even propose to introduce a regulation to avoid fraud/public inconvenience,
Bank.
How to make an application?
There is no prescribed form for making an application. The applicant may simply put down the
details on a plain white paper. The application would no doubt contain the name and address of
How will the Authority process an application?
The Authority has been given full freedom to evolve its own procedure to process the
applicants or obtain opinions of any persons/organisations.
What are the considerations for the Authority?
sought by the regulator is being used purposefully and whether such information can be less
intrusive and more focussed.
commensurate with the benefits arising out of such a regulation; whether all the information
expost random check, etc.; whether the cost of compliance incurred by the regulated is
whether the purpose can be served by any other means, such as, self-regulation, self-declaration,
whether the purpose for which a regulation was introduced continues to serve that purpose;
While taking a view on an application, the Authority will have the following considerations:
applications. It has the powers to give personal hearings or seek written clarifications from the
illustration to enable the Authority to take an expeditious view on the application.
the applicant, the suggestion made and its justification, in as much detail as possible, with an
or to avoid arbitrariness in processing of cases, or to bring in greater transparency in the Reserve
The applicant can also seek a review of the regulations which cover the Reserve Bank
above, and to make the RBI regulations simple and effective.
for ignoring or violating any of the regulations, etc., currently in force.
changed. A mere application to the Authority will not constitute a ground or provide justification
to continue to conform to the Reserve Bank regulations and directives, until they are specifically
Applications are to be made entirely on voluntary basis. It is emphasised, that unless a specific
necessary for the applicant to be an affected party.
institution (including banks) an association, an academic or even an RBI employee. It is not
It is further clarified that the Authority is not a policy making forum, and will not deal withAction on Application
on an application to the concerned department of the Reserve Bank within 45 days. All efforts
Who should the application be made to?
P.O. Box No. 10007
rra@rbi.org.in
(91) (22) (2662105)
Postal Address Reserve Bank of India (RRA)
16
Shahid 
Mumbai-400 001
Maureen Shankar
Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/1173
Bhagat Singh Road,
Central Office Building,
 floor,
th
:
: Fax
: E-Mail
:
The application may be sent by post, fax or e-mail to :
will be made to communicate the Authority's decision to the applicant.
various stages. It is expected that in normal circumstances, the Authority will convey its views
The application processing procedure envisages clearly defined time limits for processing at