RBI notifies changes in NBFC Regulations
November 16, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India today notified the changes in its regulations pertaining
to the NBFCs for implementation. The decision to modify the regulations was announced
in the Governor's Statement on Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy for
the year 1999-2000 on October 29, 1999. The changes come into force with immediate
effect.
The Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Depos its (Reserve
Bank) Directions, 1998 contained in the Notification DFC.118/ DG(SPT)-98 dated
January 31, 1998 has been amended to exempt the borrowings from mutual funds
registered with SEBI from the purview of public deposits. The NBFCs may reduce the
amount of borrowings from mutual funds while computing the outstanding public
deposits as on December 31, 1999 and maintain the liquid assets on and from April 1,
2000 on the remaining public deposit liabilities as per the extant provisions under Section
45-IB of the RBI Act, 1934.
Need for public notice 
(
(ii)  sale/transfer  of  ownership by an NBFC
NBFCs are advised to give at least three months public notice in, at least, one
leading national newspaper and a leading local vernacular language newspaper covering
 the proposal to close any of its branches/ offices,  the purpose and the arrangements
 in case of sale or transfer of ownership, whether with or without sale of shares, the
intention to sell or transfer ownership / control, the particulars of transferee and the
reasons for such sale or transfer of ownership / control.  Such public notice should be
given by the NBFC and also by the transferor or the transferee. For this purpose, the
term 'control' should have the same meaning as defined in Regulation 2(1) (c) of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and
Takeovers) Regulations, 1997.
 have been further advised that an intimation along with a copy of the
notice in respect of items ( ) and (ii) above should be sent within seven days of its
publication in the newspapers to the Regional Office of the Reserve Bank under whose
jurisdiction the registered office of the company is located.
i
NBFCs The 
(ii)
being made to service the depositors, etc., and
(i)
the place of branch / office. The notice should indicate:
i)   closure of the branch/office by an NBFC
before
Borrowings from mutual funds exempted from public depositsSuitable circular/notifications have been issued separately. The text of the circular
website at 
Release : 1999/2000/657
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
www.rbi.org.in and the notification is available on the RBI 