Bank of India, Shri Mathew Joseph, Deputy General Manager, ICICI, Shri J.P. Sharma,
General Manager, DICGC, Shri K.V. Subha Rao, Deputy General Manager, Urban BanksSelective approach to offering insurance cover to deposits with various financial institutions,
institutions after two years.
review of the position with regard to offering deposit insurance to non-banking financial
was some degree of regulatory parity between them and the banks. It has recommended a
could be considered once these entities were adequately regulated and supervised and there
finance companies, the Group has recommended that deposit insurance for these entities
institutions should be excluded from deposit insurance coverage. As for the non-banking
CAMEL rating of `C' or below consistently for the past three years and development financial
Group, banks which have not complied with capital adequacy requirements, entities with a
be compulsory, it would not be obligatory for the corporation to provide it. According to the
institutions. It has suggested that while deposit insurance cover for banks would continue to
The Group has recommended a selective approach to extension of deposit insurance cover to
and five directors to be nominated by the Reserve Bank.
representatives of supervisors of the commercial and cooperative banks of fairly senior ranks
should have a board independent of nominees of insured entities and should comprise
contributed by the Reserve Bank be set up. The Group has recommended that the corporation
the DICGC and a Deposit Insurance Corporation with a capital of Rs.500 crore to be fully
The Group has recommended that the function of credit guarantee might be withdrawn from
RBI and completed the task under the guidance of the Advisory Group.
Department, RBI and Shri D.Ajit, Director, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy,
Non-Banking Supervision, RBI, Shri M.R.Das, Chief Manager (Economic Research), State
The Working Group consisted of Shri V.S.N. Murty, Chief General Manager, Department of
Corporation.
Chandramouliswaran, Executive Director, Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
India, Dr. Ganti Subramanyam, Director, NIBM, Dr. Ajay Shah, Professor, IGIDR, Shri A.
Chairman, Bank of India, Shri S.H. Khan, Former Chairman, Industrial Development Bank of
India, Chairman, Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, Shri  M.G. Bhide, Former
The Advisory Group consisted of Shri Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
a crucial component of the financial sector reforms.
a study of the existing system of deposit insurance in India and of the need for reforms in it as
the Advisory Group set up by the Reserve Bank of India. The Group was set up to undertake
to the deposit insurance corporation are some of the far-reaching recommendations made by
assigning to it a larger role in deposit insurance, assigning the role of liquidator and receiver
guarantee from the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) and
risk based pricing of deposit insurance premium, withdrawing the function of credit
November 2, 1999
Changes in Deposit Insurance in India
RBI Group suggests Far-reachingAlpana Killawala
should have access to inspection reports of RBI on banks and be involved in post inspection
Press Release : 1999-2000/601
General Manager
insurance in India. awareness programme to be taken up on deposit 
of liquidator and receiver to the corporation. The Group has also recommended a public
action plan and its compliance by banks. The Group has recommended assigning of the role
banks which do not return data to the deposit insurance. It has suggested that the corporation
Group has also suggested of 50 to 100 basis point higher deposit insurance premium for
the Reserve Bank through a well-defined platform that could be statutorily mandated. The
Group has recommended periodical exchange of information  between the corporation and
desirable to base pricing of risk based premium on the latest available CAMEL rating. The
the present flat-rate system to minimise moral hazard. It has also suggested that it would be
The Group has recommended risk-based pricing of the deposit insurance premium as against
Government to meet any contingencies.
collaterised liquidity support from the Reserve Bank and financial support from the
last resort facility from the central bank or the Government, the Group has favoured
the insured deposits. While recommending that the Corporation should have a lender of the
the target level. The corporation could also explore possibilities of reinsuring 2.5 per cent of
could be adjusted upwards or downwards if the fund falls below a threshold level or exceeds
for cooperative banks to be maintained at two per cent of the insured deposits. The premium
The Group has recommended two insurance funds, one for commercial banks and the other
transferring subordinated liabilities at least six months prior to bank failure or moratorium.
deposit insurance coverage as also deposits taken as cash collaterals and deposits created by
insurance. The Group has also recommended exclusion of certificates of deposits from the
one lakh be offered cover limited to 90 per cent. Thus introducing an element of co-
deposits up to Rs.90,000 be covered at 100 per cent and deposits between Rs.90,000 and Rs.,
Rs. one lakh per depositor in the same right and capacity. It has, however, suggested that
The Group has recommended no change in the present deposit insurance coverage which is