July 17, 1999
are legal tenders and banks and members of public should continue to accept these notes in their
tender are acceptable at the counters of bank branches and also of the Reserve Bank.
Rs.500 are not being readily accepted by the members of public for fear of their being forged.
The fear of forgery is largely reported in the currency notes in the denomination of Rs.500 in the
old series which are green in 
window on the left of the note) and portrait of Mahatma Gandhi on the right. The new series has
portrait of Mahatma Gandhi in the watermark.
Rs.500 note in the old series with Ashoka Pillar in the watermark is genuine or not by ensuring
1. 
2. The legend 'RESERVE BANK OF INDIA', '500', printed in the 
touch.
3. Both the panels containing the serial number of the note are printed in fluorescent ink and
4. There 
5. The note contains the security thread on the 
1. 
Gandhi in the watermark. The watermark is in the white space seen on the left of the notes.
2. 
3. 
continuous black line. The security thread contains the word "RBI" and
  
written alternatively on it which can be seen only on the front side 
of the note.
clearly
" "
identified as a broken silver line; but if held against light, this silver line can be seen as a
The security thread in a note is placed on the right hand side of the note and can be easily
effect when held against light.
The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi can be clearly seen in the watermark as a light and shade
Rs.500 denomination notes issued in Mahatma Gandhi series have the portrait of Mahatma
notes that can be seen with naked eyes are given below:
To help public identify genuine notes in the new series of Rs.500, the security features of these
left hand side of the note.
vertically at the same level.
note is held horizontally at the eye level and 'RBI' can be seen when the note is held
that is below the portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. The latent image of '500' can be seen when the
is  a latent image of the numeral '500' and the word RBI in the horizontal green belt
glow when the note is held against an ultra violet lamp.
mark for the blind are in raised printing, known as intaglio. The raised printing can be felt by
language panel, five small black lines on the left side of the note meant to be an identification
promise clause in Hindi and English, Ashoka Pillar emblem, Mahatma Gandhi portrait,
 of the note, the centre
shade effect.
Watermark of Ashoka Pillar emblem is clearly seen when held against the light as a light and
that they contain the following features:
The Reserve Bank of India has also advised that the members of public can themselves check if a
colour having Ashoka Pillar as the watermark (located in the white
It has come to the notice of the Reserve Bank of India that currency notes in the denomination of
daily transactions or in exchange. The Reserve Bank has also stated that these notes being legal
The Reserve Bank has advised in public interest that all Rs.500 notes issued by the Reserve Bank
Reserve Bank advice on Rs.500 Notes4. 
on both sides of the notes - front and back. The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, numeral 500,
Ashoka
signature - are all embossed on these notes. These can be felt by touch.
5. The notes also have solid circle in black in raised printing in between the flower and the
to identify the note by touch.
The following security features in the new series of 
1. 
2. The flower on the Ashoka Pillar
3. fibres. Both can
4. 
fine line design. When seen through a magnifying glass, the design will actually show "RBI"
5. Watermark window contains 
All notes have a unique crackle sound.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/90
Press 
criss-cross lines that can be seen through a magnifying glass.
and denominational value '500' written in very small letters.
Between the head of the Mahatma Gandhi portrait and the green panel, the notes have very
be seen when the notes are exposed to ultraviolet lamp.
The number panels are printed in fluorescent ink; the notes also have optical 
the solid fits into the hollow perfectly.
emblem has a hollow design in front with solid on the back. When note is held against light,
left hand side of the watermark window slightly above the 
level.
side of the note. The latent image can be seen only when the note is held against light at eye
The note has a latent image of the numeral '500' in the green vertical band placed on the right
is closely examined:
Rs. 500 note can also be seen when the note
Ashoka Pillar emblem on the left side of the watermark. This is to help the visually impaired
Pillar which is placed on the bottom left side of the watermark, as also, the RBI Governor's
watermark and the portrait of the Mahatma Gandhi, guarantee and promise clauses, 
RBI seal, an arch-like pattern which can be seen below the RBI legend and in between
Several important features have been embossed or printed in raised manner, called intaglio,