August 19, 1999
liberalisation of the
would call for active involvement of commercial banks as well as coordinated efforts on
the part of Reserve Bank of India. Against this background, the Reserve Bank constituted
Shri N.K. Puri, Chief
of the other banks and the concerned departments of the Reserve Bank.
of external assets and liabilities in all currencies with details such as sector, type of
; country and residual maturity. This would also include foreign
currency position vis-a-vis residents. With regard to international assets, the Group has
the data flow could be from branches to the Head Offices of banks and from Head
operationalisation
flow of information from the banks to the RBI. To enable this, the Group has
consider necessary changes in the same. The Group has 
for implementation of the 
from multiplicity of returns, the Group has urged the RBI to undertake
soundness of the banking sector with regard to its international exposures in terms of
banking sector. The Group has also recommended setting up of a Standing Monitoringexternal sector, close monitoring, on an ongoing basis, of the international claims and
country, currency etc. and facilitate relevant policy formulation. This would also enable
The Group's Report would help to evolve data which will throw light on the overall
access to all the data user departments.
recommended establishment of a Central Data Base Management System at the RBI with
emerging developments on the technological front. Towards this, the Group has
rationalisation/simplification of the existing statistical returns, keeping in view the
Recognising the need to minimise the reporting burden on the banking system arising
recommendations which could begin with December 1999.
favoured a step by step approach
Group to oversee the implementation of the recommended reporting arrangements and to
recommended speedy computerisation and establishment of requisite connectivity in the
 of the VSAT based wide area network would over time facilitate direct
Offices of bank to the RBI in a consolidated manner through computer media, the
While recommended collection of data according to the country of ultimate risk as well. 
liability or asset, currency
quarterly basis. Under the recommended arrangements, the banks should report all details
monitoring of the international claims and liabilities of the Indian banking system on a
Group has recommended introduction of a comprehensive return to enable effective
compilation and dissemination of data on banks' international liabilities and assets, the
After reviewing and examining the international practices concerning the reporting,
General Manager, State Bank of India as the Chairman, with members drawn from some
the Working Group on International Banking Statistics with 
system for the purpose should match international standards in quality and timeliness and
to gauge the developments in international banking. The setting up of an information
liabilities of the Indian banking sector has also become necessary. This will enable India
critical importance at the international level. With the growing 
comprehensive information on international exposure of commercial banks has assumed
In the context of the recent crisis in East Asia, the need for collection of timely and
International Banking Statistics
Report of the Working Group onhelp in developing requisite risk management strategies and monitoring their exposures
banks.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/257
Press 
and currency details would be useful in Treasury Management exercises in reporting
to minimise concentration of claims on any single country/currency. Similarly, maturity
inter country comparisons as well. In the case of reporting banks, this would be of great