RBI sets up Working Group to study the recommendations
for SMART Card based Payment System Standards
September 7, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has constituted a Working Group in the Department of
Information Technology to study the recommendations on standards for SMART Card based
Payment Systems made by the Indian Institute of Technology, Powai.  The recommendations
have been made in document “SMART Card based Payment System Standards” version 3.0,
as part of the “Project SMART Rupees System (SMARS)”.
The Project ‘SMART Rupees System (SMARS)’ is a pilot project on SMART Card
technology in India. The project has been undertaken to examine the viability and use of
SMART Cards as retail payment instruments within the country. The project undertaken at
the instance of the Reserve Bank of India, is a collaborative venture in which the Indian
Institute of Technology, Powai, the Institute for Development and Research in Banking
Technology, Hyderabad, hardware and software vendors, and two commercial banks (State
Bank of India and Canara Bank) are partners. The pilot phase of the project commenced on
December 3, 1998.
The composition of the Working Group 
1. Dr. A.Vasudevan
Reserve Bank of India
2. Shri M.N.Dandekar
Indian Banks’ Association
3. Dr.V.P.Gulati
Director
Institute for Development and Research
Hyderabad
4. Prof.D.B.Phatak
Department of Computer Sciences and Engineering
Powai
5. Shri 
Chief General Manager
State Bank of India
6. Shri 
1
Member S.Venkatachalam
Mumbai
Systems and Technology
Member K.Seshashayi
Indian Institute of Technology
Member
In Banking Technology
Member
Mumbai
Chief Executive and Secretary
Member
Executive Director
Chairman
is :Vice President, Information Technology
Citibank N.A.
7. Shri A.K.S.Rao
Canara Bank
8. Shri 
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Department of Information Technology
Reserve Bank of India
The terms of reference of the Working Group are 
1. study the various recommendations for “SMART Card based Payment System Standards”
version 3.0 made by Project SMART Rupees System (SMARS);
2. corroborate these standards with the international standards (ISO) and / or those prevalent
in Europe; and
3. examine the relevance of the remaining recommendations to the circumstances arising
The Working Group will submit its Report by November 30, 1999.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/346
2
Press 
from the developments in the Payment and Settlement systems in the country.
to :
Mumbai
Member-Secretary S.R.Mittal
Bangalore
Computer Policy and Planning Department
General Manager
Member
Mumbai