1997 an NBFC cannot commence financial business as above without
 
 
Alpana Killawala
unincorporated bodies in any manner whatsoever, is not only unauthorised and improper but it
Press Release: 1998-99/1133
General Manager
name of RBI in any manner will be illegal and unauthorised.
question of registration of unincorporated bodies with the Bank does not arise. Hence, the use of
as specified in the RBI Act or in the corporate bodies notified under the RBI Act. Further, the
advertisement for soliciting deposits as also from accepting deposits from other than the relatives
(v) Unincorporated bodies engaged in financial business are prohibited from issuing any
registration.
the NBFCs which are not holding/accepting public deposits on the date of grant of b)
the new NBFCs incorporated after January 9, 1997. a)
prior specific approval of the RBI for acceptance of public deposits.
(iv) Even after registration with RBI, the following types of NBFCs have been directed to obtain
to get certificate of registration till their NOF reaches up to that level.
public deposits including the renewal of the maturing public deposits since they are not eligible
(iii) The NBFCs having Net Owned Fund (NOF) below Rs.25 lakhs are not allowed to accept
obtaining a certificate of registration from RBI.
(ii) After January 9, 
other public agency.
is that of the NBFC. Such deposits are not guaranteed or insured by Government, RBI or any
acceptance of deposits. The responsibility for repayment of the principal and payment of interest
simply enable an NBFC for commencing or carrying on the financial business including the
i) A registration certificate issued to an NBFC under Section 45-IA of the RBI Act would (
inter alia, required to observe the following deposit acceptance norms:
The members of public are hereby informed that the NBFCs while soliciting public deposits are,
Indian Penal Code.
may also attract penal action, as provided under the Reserve Bank of India's Act and/or the
display of the RBI's name by the registered NBFCs whether registered or unregistered, and
advertisements/neon sign boards and/or such other material while soliciting public deposits. Such
Companies (NBFCs) and other persons are unauthorisedly using the RBI's name in their
It has come to the notice of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) that certain Non-Banking Finance
March 5, 1999
RBI cautions against unauthorised use of RBI name by NBFCs