 
01 Nov 1999 
 
 
RBI Working Group suggests roadmap 
for Credit Information Bureau 
 
The Working Group constituted by the Reserve Bank of India to explore the possibilities of setting 
up a Credit Information Bureau in India submitted its report today. The Group in its report has 
pointed out that under the existing legal framework disclosure of information on banks’ customers 
is prohibited. However, pending legislative amendments, a beginning might be made for setting 
up a Credit Information Bureau that can operate with information relating to suit filed accounts 
and information on transactions on which the constituent has given consent to the bank to 
disclose.  
The Group in its report has recommended that the Bureau should collect both negative and 
positive information relating to credit, trade and financial information including external borrowings 
on corporate and consumer/retail segments such as, credit facilities availed of from banks, 
NBFCs as also credit cards held, indebtedness to housing finance companies, mobile phone 
companies, etc. 
The Group has expressed the view that a foreign technology partner might also be involved in 
setting up of the Bureau to benefit from the expertise available with them. 
According to the Group, the Credit Information Bureau should be a repository of both, positive 
and negative information. This would require enactment of a master legislation to facilitate 
collection and sharing of information. The Group has recommended that the Bureau could be set 
up as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 or as a subsidiary company with share capital 
contribution from its user groups viz., commercial banks, financial institutions and non-banking 
financial companies registered with the Reserve Bank.  
The Group has recommended that the Bureau should be technology-driven and professionally 
managed company with minimum manual intervention. The Bureau should use state-of-the-art 
information technology. It has also recommended building up an effective system and evolving a 
code of conduct among the members for protection of data and regulation of its use.  
The Group has also recommended that the Credit Information Bureau should function as a 
commercial organisation. The Group has also envisaged establishing of more than one Bureau to 
cater the need of different market segments and much coverage of geographical area of the 
country.  
The Group has also noted that since information relating to informal trade centre and inter-deposit 
corporate deposits would have to be collected from the market sources, the Bureau should have 
an effective market intelligence division. This division should have the responsibility of not only 
collecting financial information but also validating it.  
The Group has noted that an appropriate regulatory framework for credit information bureau is 
necessary. Accordingly it has suggested that the proposed legislation should have provisions in 
relation to data protection, privacy, redressal of grievances for customers, etc.  The copies of the report are being sent to the Government and banks. The report is also being 
released to the public for information through the RBI website (URL : www.rbi.org.in) . The 
Reserve Bank will further process the report taking into account the comments and views of all 
concerned. 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager 
Press Release : 1999-2000/599 
 