August 10, 1999
Maharashtra
business through public deposit.
companies and unincorporated bodies functioning in the state of Maharashtra 
State Government machinery. The meeting was presided over by Deputy Governor, 
S.P. 
Wing, Mumbai, Commissioner of Police of Thane, Commissioner of Police of New
official from Home Department, Member of Company Law Board, Registrar of
Mumbai and Executive Director, Securities Exchange Board of India.
Bank in order to consolidate the companies which have already been registered and steps
appreciated the Maharashtra
Protection of interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Ordinance, 1999. The
are spread all over the remote parts of the State, State
so that there is proper coordination and effective follow up wherever action needed.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/207
unauthorised agencies, unincorporated bodies 
Press 
suggested improving market intelligence and sharing the information with other agencies
machinery could play a greater role in effectively controlling them, he stated. He also
different types of schemes. As they 
which lure gullible depositors by offering
help of the other regulatory agencies as well as the state authorities to curb the
Ordinance is designed to protect the interest of the depositors in the State. He sought the
Maharashtra State government's initiative in passing the 
taken in respect of the companies which are weak and defaulting. The Deputy Governor
The Deputy Governor explained to the participants the steps initiated by the Reserve
Companies, Deputy Director, Department of Company Affairs Western Regional Office
Mumbai, Central Bureau of Investigations (Economic Offences Wing), State Government
The meeting was attended by top police officials of the Economic Offences Talwar. 
Shri
the rationale behind the Reserve Bank seeking active involvement and support of the
expectations of the regulatory framework introduced from January 1997 and appreciate
organised to share the in Mumbai by the Reserve Bank of India today. The meeting was 
organised
The agreement came at a high level meeting on regulation of non-banking financial
improve the quality of supervision over entities engaged in non-banking financial
. It was also agreed to hold similar high level meetings of all regulators to
of non-banking financial companies and unincorporated bodies functioning in the State of
periodical intervals to share information and recommend follow up action on regulation
agreed to appoint a small regional coordination committee which will meet at regular
The Reserve Bank of India, the state level officials and other regulatory agencies have
Maharashtra Functioning in the State of 
Financial Companies and Unincorporated Bodies
High Level Meeting on Regulation of Non-Banking