August 2, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has today advised all nidhi companies, chit fund companies and
return on deposits. The return should be submitted in the format of the First Schedule on or
before September 30, 1999.
fund company and such other NBFC that held public deposits as on March 31,1999. The
Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs) should similarly furnish the return in the
The Reserve Bank of India has emphasised that submission of the annual return on deposits is
provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act. The stipulated date for receipt of the return in
the Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India is September 30, 1999.
Background
Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs) as on March 31 every year by September 30 of
http://www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/162
concerned Regional Office of the Department of Non-Banking Supervision.
Press 
URL: 
for ensuring their timely submission. The formats are available on RBI Website.
that year. In the past, the formats of these returns were mailed to the companies individually
holding public deposits including nidhis and chit fund companies and in Schedule 'A' by
The annual statutory return in the First Schedule is required to be submitted by all NBFCs
RNBCs, and non-submission of the return will be viewed seriously attracting penal
a statutory obligation of all the NBFCs holding public deposits, chit fund companies and
(i.e., as on March 31, 1998) or may request for a copy of the format of the return from
Reserve Bank. The companies may use the format of the return submitted by them last year
or its application is pending with the Reserve Bank or its application had been rejected by the
format of Schedule-A irrespective of whether it has been granted Certificate of Registration
It has been clarified that the return is required to be submitted by every nidhi company, chit
non-banking financial companies holding public deposits to submit the annual statutory
Annual Statutory Returns on Deposits
All NBFCs and RNBCs to submit