Mr. Richard Celeste, US Ambassador to India met the heads of the financial institutions
Sachedev, Principal Financial Group, Shri
Zubin 
Alpana Killawala
accompanied by Mr. David Good, Consul General, and Mr. Jerrold Mallory, Consul
Press Release : 1999-2000/388
General Manager
direction.
given about the banking sector reforms and the stable progress that India had made in this
maintain parity in applicability of the regulatory requirements. A brief overview was also
matter of time when both could evolve as universal banks keeping in view the need to
financial institutions to convert themselves into universal banking entities. It was only a
the Reserve Bank that there is no legal restriction for the banks and development
The issues relating to the universal banking were also discussed and it was pointed out by
Finance.
role of banks in undertaking insurance business in consultation with the Ministry of
and both, the Insurance Regulatory Authority and the Reserve Bank were examining the
indicated the Insurance Regulatory Authority Bill was yet to be passed by the Parliament
industrial sectors the broadening of the insurance sector was an important issue. It was
need for long term funds for development of infrastructure sector as well as other
services both in life and general insurance. The participants felt that keeping in view the
introduction of insurance products and technological back-up for providing insurance
The main focus of the discussion was the potential for business in insurance sector,
Directors and other senior officials.
Affairs). The Reserve Bank was represented by the Deputy Governors, Executive
Kapadia, Vice Consul (Economic Monie, Sr. Economic Adviser and Shri Krishna 
American International Group, Shri Sanjay 
Verma, Dalip (Political/Economics), Mr. Norman Sorensen, Principal International, Shri 
business in the wake of the proposed Insurance Regulatory Authority Bill. He was
financial sector reforms in India, universal banking and issues relating to insurance
including IDBI, LIC, GIC and UTI and banks in the Reserve Bank of India to discuss
September 16, 1999
US Ambassador visits RBI