Status on Year 2000 Compliance in
The banking and Financial Sector
June 29, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has been undertaking number of initiatives for year 200 compliance
of the banking and financial sectors. A Monograph ‘Year 2000 Preparations in the Banking and
Financial Sector’ was first brought out by the Reserve Bank of India in December 1998. It gave
an update on Y2K compliance in the banking and financial sector as on November 1998. The
monograph has now been updated till may 1999. It is an effort to build confidence in the minds
by the Reserve bank and the financial sector for achieving Y2K compliance, in coordination with
the Government of India, Indian Banks’ Association, associations of trade, commerce and
industry, SEBI, insurance, power, telecom and transport services. The Monograph ‘Year 2000
Preparations in the Banking and Financial Sector’ is available on the Reserve Bank 
( :www.rbi.org.in ) and will be updated periodically.
The updated version of the monograph ‘Year 2000 Preparations in the Banking and Financial
focusses on the need for business continuity planning. This involves continued testing of
environment. The key objective of contingency planning is to identify possible risks to what is
critical for business continuity and development and implementation of strategies to reduce the
risks or mitigate their impact. The Reserve Bank has advised banks and financial institutions to
keep up-to-date printed hared copies of the important books of accounts and customer accounts,
etc., as a part of contingency plan. This would help temporary switchover to manual procedures
with ease in the event of any disruption caused due to year 2000. Further, they have been advised
to identify possible sources of liquidity and take measures to ensure adequate supply of cash
through the currency chests. The Reserve Bank has stressed the need for having key personnel
with the knowledge and skill to respond to particular difficulties during the roll over period and
the first few months of the year 2000. The Reserve Bank has also taken all measures to be Y2K
The Reserve Bank is in the process of installing the state-of-the-art technology mainframe
Chennai, Calcutta and New Delhi. These would
be live during July-October 1999. The solution has already been tested for Y2K compliance.
Around 70 percent of commercial banks are reported to be Y2K compliant up to May 1999; and
the rest are expected to be Y2K compliant by June 1999. Non-banking subsidiaries of
commercial banks are already Y2K compliant. In respect of financial institutions, around 40 per
cent are Y2K compliant, whereas another about 23 per cent are expected to be compliant before
June end.
The Working Group set up by the Reserve Bank to monitor Y2K compliance in the banking and
financial sector, at its meeting held today proposed that at its next meeting representatives of
systems at National Clearing Cells at Mumbai, 
compliant in all its operational departments.
the systems and preparation of detailed contingency plans and their testing in simulated
Sector’ 
URL
website
of the public involved in different economic activities. It gives an account of the initiatives takenapex bodies in the financial sector such as, SEBI, IRA, IDBI, NABARD, NHB, GIC, LIC, UTI,
etc., may be invited to review the progress of Y2K compliance in their respective sectors.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1998-99/1644
Press 