January 6, 1999
The Development Research Group (DRG) of the Reserve Bank of India has brought out
its Study Series No. 17 entitled "The Impact of the Uruguay Round on Growth and
Structure of Indian Economy". The study is authored jointly by Dr.R. Bharadwaj,
Bank and the pool of research talents within the Bank. These studies are released for
wider circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among professional
The views expressed in these studies are those of the
authors and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank.
Uruguay Round is the longest Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) which began in September 1986 at Punta del Este, Uruguay and concluded in
Marrakkesh, Morocco. 
economy in view of the establishment of the WTO in January 1, 1995, enhancing the
negotiations viz, trade in services, trade-related investment measures (TRIMS) and trade
In this context, the study attempts to provide an estimate of likely consequences of the
major Uruquay Round negotiations. The
six textile sub-sectors, wood & paper products, drugs & medicines and the residual
sector.
GATT and OECD, GNP at constant prices may increase by 1.4 per cent per annum,
trade and employment. Assuming that world prices change by the amounts indicated by
agreements is likely to be beneficial for the Indian economy in terms of growth, foreign
The results of the study indicate that the overall impact of the Uruguay Round
sectors are paddy, wheat, pulses, cotton, sugar, beverages, tobacco and tobacco products,
sectors which are the thrust sectors for the 
India's levels of output, foreign trade, prices and employment. It has focussed on 15
used a general equilibrium approach to study various impacts of the Uruguay Round on
Uruguay Round for the Indian economy under alternative policy situations. The study has
related intellectual property rights (TRIPS).
order and also due to the inclusion of three new fields within the fold of multilateral trade
scope for multilateral mechanisms for supervision as well as freer international trade
The Uruguay Round has far reaching implications for the world
formally concluded on April 15, 1994 when 116 member nations signed the agreement in
Geneva, Switzerland on December 15, 1993. The negotiation of the Uruguay Round, was
The present study analyses the impact of the Uruguay Round on the Indian economy. The
economists and policy makers. 
studies are the outcome of collaborative efforts between experts from outside the Reserve
backed by strong analytical and empirical basis on subjects of current interest. DRG
Reserve Bank of India. The DRG undertakes quick and effective policy-oriented research
and Policy and Smt.Nishita Raje, Assistant Adviser, Monetary Policy Department of the
along with Shri Sujan Hajra, Research Officer of the Department of Economic Analysis
Professor and Chairman, Institute for Educational Research and Development, Bangalore
and Structure of India Economy"
"The Impact of the Uruguay Round on Growth
No.17 : Development Research Group Study Series external competition under the emerging freer international trade order.
From the perspective of a policy framework the study points out that further trade
orientation of the economy, a proper positioning of the exchange rate and a stable and
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/894
the Uruguay Round for the Indian economy.
consistent commercial policy for certain sectors will be needed to maximise gains from
industries require concerted efforts to enhance their efficiency so that they can face
the need for carrying out restructuring in certain segments of the textile sector. These
are likely to benefit from the outcome of the Uruguay Round. These results also indicate
per cent. At the disaggregated level, sectors within agriculture and agro-based industries
exports by more than 3.5 per cent, imports by 1.1 per cent and employment by around 1.2