Report on Currency and Finance for 1998-99 - New Directions and
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, 1999
Background
The Reserve Bank of India today released its yearly Report on Currency and Finance for
addition  to providing information on time series basis on different
New 
Finance thematic and research oriented. 
of the economy with focus on the theme of structural transformation of the Indian
economy 
Contents
financial markets and external sectors, as in the earlier Reports. One of the chapters 
capital account 
Handbook on Statistics
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy
macroeconomic indicators for a longer period (as compared with data series for a shorter
outside published sources. data are drawn from within the Reserve Bank and from 
on major growth rates and ratios of important economic indicators has also been added. The
contains 198 tables. The first volume released, in 1998 contained 135 tables. A new section
period in the erstwhile Volume II of the Report on Currency and Finance). The volume
 has a wider coverage and provides data on time series on major Handbook The 
 is being issued in place of the Volume II of the Report on Currency and Finance. Handbook
. The The Report is released along with the 
sector in crisis resolution.
liberalisation, transparency and information disclosure and the role of private
strengthening multilateral surveillance, choice of exchange rate regime, capital controls and
on reforms of the international monetary and financial system and discusses issues such as,
focusses
The Report has eleven chapters. They cover macro economy and the real, monetary, fiscal,
since the eighties.
been prepared by economists of the Reserve Bank who have worked on different areas
Essentially a research document, the Report has
Against this background, the Reserve Bank has, this year made the Report on Currency and
Directions : Thematic and Research Oriented
aspects of the economy on a regular basis.
focusses on a theme in 
Recently there has also been expression of interest in a publication by the Reserve Bank that
duplication of the Annual Report and the Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India.
recent years, the Report on Currency and Finance is sometimes viewed as more or less a
Currency and Finance. As a result of enhancements brought about in these two reports in the
on Trend and Progress of Banking in India. Both these reports precede the Report on
also brings out two statutory publications each year, namely its Annual Report and the Report
policy-makers, researchers and keen observers of the Indian economy. The Reserve Bank
information and analysis. The document has been a source of standard reference material for
statutory Report, the objective of the Report on Currency and Finance has been to provide
first of which pertained to the years 1935-36 and 1936-37 and published in 1937. A non-
1998-99. This Report is being published since the inception of the Reserve Bank of India, the
December 30, 1999Releases : 1999-2000/848
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
at bringing to the fore, the research initiatives within the Reserve Bank.
The Reserve Bank would greatly appreciate comments and suggestions on this maiden effort
Feedback