Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers -
Summer 1999 Issue
August 4, 1999
Summer 1999 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers (
redefine the concept of Deba
Prasad Sen 
recognised that there
G.P. 
factor
Abhiman 
variations of profitability among public sector banks in the context of the financial sector
both sides of the balance sheet in order to 
profitability. The process of reform imposes pressure for improvement on the weak banks.
economise on transaction costs and strengthen
interest income by improving the delivery of financial services and efficient management of
maximising non- function and a distinct risk aversion is observed. The article recommends 
A reduction in the burden of raising working funds due to diversification in the banking
reforms in India with the help of a sequential decomposition model for profitability analysis.
Das evaluates inter bank Public Sector Banks - A decomposition Model" by 
intermediation. The article "Profitability of purveyed i.e. the transaction costs of financial 
which impinges upon the cost of holding money is the efficiency with which money is
Inflation is essentially the opportunity cost of sacrificing current spending. A critical 
article reinforce the case for monitoring core inflation measures in India.
showing that core inflation triggers changes in the non-core components of inflation, the
channels of monetary policy, besides being intuitively appealing, timely and robust. By
inflation which exhibit superiority over the standard measures in tracking the transmission
transient, supply shocks need to be excluded. The article proposes four measures of 'Core'
Elements which are strongly influenced by inflationary pressures which are within its control. 
to its inflation performance needs to be provided for in terms of those elements of
Samanta argues that the accountability of the central bank with regard Perspectives" by 
India : Measurement and Policy bank's control. The second article "Core Inflation in 
are several factors which impact upon inflation but remain outside the purview of the central
in countries where inflation mandates have been legislated, it has been 
central bank has come to be regarded as synonymous with its inflation record; however, even
money which does not lose value in relation to transactions over time. The credibility of the
bank is whether or not the central bank has been able to provide to it a money that it can trust;
The principal consideration in the public's assessment of the mandate placed with the central
policy.
aggregates are recommended as efficient guideposts for the future conduct of monetary
performs better than the conventional aggregates in explaining inflation. The new money
on  a residency basis, article empirically demonstrates that a measure of money, defined 
recent Working Group on Money Supply for an economy in the process of opening up. The
Gupta examines the implications of the recommendations of the Indranil Rath and 
moneyness, the article on 'Residency in Money supply' by 
currency denominated assets/liabilities and evolution of new financial instruments which
does. In view of the growing portfolio diversification of the public to include foreign
banks have found it necessary to enunciate what money is, or more specifically, what money
since societies have invested central banks with the mandate of managing money, central
markets across borders has brought about fundamental changes in the concept of money. Ever
In recent years, structural changes in financial systems and the integration of financial
authors and their personal views.
articles, one review article and two book reviews. They reflect the research efforts of the
OPs) contains three The Sujan 
( P.V. 
Release : 1999-2000/173
Press 
. Manager Asstt
Sadananadan)
end of this year.
issues involved and preparing for the millenium round of WTO negotiations at Seattle at the
tariff aspects of India's foreign trade policies vis-a-vis the WTO with a view to flagging the
Hajra examines non- policies are in violation of the WTO norms. The review article by 
national trade policy regimes. Several areas have been identified in which India's trade
In general, peer pressure and collective action is intended to ensure WTO compatibility for
Organisation (WTO) lies in the degree of accountability it imposes upon member countries.
evolution of the international financial architecture. The distinctiveness of the World Trade
centre-stage in the The establishment of a multilateral trading system has come to occupy the 