 
 
05 May 1999 
 
 
RBI list of NBFCs registered and permitted to accept Public Deposits and 
those which have been denied registration to function as NBFC On RBI 
website 
 
 
The Reserve Bank of India has on its website (URL: http://www.rbi.org.in) released the all India 
lists of non-banking financial companies. 
i. 584 non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) whose applications for certificate for 
registration under Section 45IA of RBI Act, 1934 have been approved and have been 
allowed to hold/accept deposits from public; and 
ii. 1032 NBFCs including Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs) whose applications 
for certificate of registration under Section 45 IA of RBI Act, 1934 have been rejected. 
Anyone interested in the information may download it from the RBI website. The RBI will regularly 
update the lists. 
 
The Reserve Bank has also sent copy each of these lists to all the State Government and Union 
Territories to enlist their support in ensuring that the unauthorized and unregistered NBFCs do 
not accept public deposits. The State Governments and Union Territories have the resources and 
machinery available with them even at small towns and places and are thus better placed to 
ensure that unauthorized and unregistered NBFCs do not accept public deposits. 
 
While 1032 companies, which have been refused Certificate of Registration by the Reserve Bank 
should immediately cease to function as NBFCs under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, the companies, which have not applied for registration to the Reserve Bank should also 
cease to function as NBFCs. 
 
584 companies registered with the Reserve Bank can accept public deposits subject to their 
compliance with the regulatory framework including the need for minimum investment grade 
credit rating, as applicable. However, 6821 NBFCs either having a track record of less than two 
years and those not holding any public deposits on the date of grant of registration are not 
allowed to accept public deposits without the prior specific approval of the Reserve Bank of India 
even though registered with it. The NBFCs having net owned funds below Rs. 25 lakh are 
precluded from accepting public deposits in any manner. 
 
Members of the public are advised to remain vigilant of the above factors and should not deposit 
their money with unregistered and unauthorized NBFCs. The members of public are also 
cautioned that unincorporated entities like individuals, firms, Hindu Undivided Families, 
associations of persons, etc., are allowed to accept deposits only from their relatives, corporate 
bodies as specified in the Reserve Bank of India Act, banks and financial institutions. They are 
neither allowed to accept deposits from others nor can they issue advertisement for mobilizing 
deposits.  
While the Reserve Bank or any other government agency does not guarantee repayment of 
deposits, the Reserve Bank has been taking various prudential regulations/ supervisory 
measures so that NBFCs grow on healthy and sound lines. With a view to educating the general 
public, the Reserve Bank has been undertaking publicity campaign through print media, indicating 
the names of the NBFCs which have been refused registration and have been prohibited from 
accepting public deposits, as also, 'Do’s and Don’ts', which a prospective investor should keep in 
mind before taking a decision to invest money in a particular NBFC. 
 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager 
Press Release : 1998-99/1363 
 