The high level ‘Working Group on Y2K Issues’ of the Reserve Bank of India met under
the guidance of the Deputy Governor, Shri S.P.Talwar today at Mumbai.  The members
reviewed the progress made by the banks and the financial institutions including the
Reserve Bank of India and noted the progress in the financial sector.
The banks and financial institutions have reported that they have upgraded their computer
systems i.e. hardware and software, done extensive testing, developed contingency plans
and their mock testing  in simulated environment and have put in place the event
management mechanism for smooth roll over to the Year 2000.  It was noted that as part
of the contingency plans  manual operations will be conducted along with the
It was also noted that the computer system at the Reserve Bank including those having
interface with banks and financial institutions have been made Y2K ready.  The Y2K
compliant magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) cheque processing systems at four
metropolitan towns i.e. Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Calcutta have gone live during July
– October 1999 without any disruption.  As these systems are consistent with those in the
banks, the payments system has become Y2K ready. The systems at Deposit Accounts
and Public Accounts Departments, Public Debt Office and Issue Department of the Bank
having direct dealings with the public have been made Y2K compliant and live runs have
As a part of the Y2K preparedness, the Reserve Bank has set up event management
centres at its Central Office Departments and at Regional Offices.  These Centres will not
only manage the smooth transition to Year 2000 within the Reserve Bank but also
monitor the developments in banks and other financial institutions in their respective
The Reserve Bank has also made arrangements to ensure that adequate cash is  available
at RBI Issue Offices and in  currency chests with commercial banks.  Banks have reported
about assessment of  their cash requirements and their plans to store  sufficient cash as
The members of the high level working group strongly felt that during the remaining
period of 1999, focused attention should be paid on information sharing for better public
awareness on Y2K readiness status and contingency planning to ensure  business
It was decided in the meeting that the Chairmen and/or other senior executives of banks
should give press statements on their Y2K status, contingency ,  business continuity plans
and event management mechanism.  Banks should be prepared to expeditiously issue hard
copy of accounts of customers in the last week of December 1999.  They should give
assurance of smooth roll over to Year 2000 to their customers also through posters and
It was also decided that the Chairman, Indian Banks' Association (IBA) should organize
publicity campaign for creating better awareness of public on Y2K readiness, contingency
other critical campaign media.
continuity.
part of their contingency plans.
areas of jurisdiction.
commenced since last 3-4 months.
computerized operations during the transition to the new millennium.
December 10, 1999
RBI assures for smooth rollover to the millenniumplans, coordination with other segments of the economy, etc. Some of the banks could
demonstrate to the Press the exercise done for  testing of their critical systems in relation
to certain critical millennium dates. Information on functioning of MICR 
processing  centres and other clearing houses on December 31, 1999 and January 1, 2000
should be suitably publicized for public information. Information on rollover to Year
2000 by banks and financial institutions should be made available by the RBI and IBA to
media on January 1, 2000 and January 3, 2000 (being the first working day for public
:1999-2000/766
transactions).
Press Release
Manager
Rupambara Padhi
cheque