April 12, 1999
invest the amount in government securities ;
the depositors are untraceable and the deposits remained unpaid/unclaimed or the depositors
conditions, NBFCs have represented that their efforts have proved unsuccessful either because
payable rate of interest by one percentage point for premature payments, subject to certain
exit from the public deposits. While NBFCs can prepay the public deposits without reducing the
public deposits and many such companies have indicated to the Reserve bank their intention to
The Reserve Bank has shifted its regulatory and supervisory focus to NBFCs holding/accepting
Background
limited manner. They are not subject to stricter prudential norms.
companies not holding/not accepting public deposits are regulated by the Reserve Bank in a
to become non-public deposit holding companies. In terms of the present regulatory framework,
This facility will benefit the NBFCs which are intending to exit from public deposits and desire
effect.
(v) The company may also be asked to submit a resolution from its board of directors to this
deposits or renew such maturing deposits in any manner.
(iv) The company should tender an undertaking that it would not accept any further public
deposits within the current month.
public deposits on production of a certificate from its auditor about the amount of maturing
(iii) Such securities can be withdrawn only at the beginning of each month only for repayment of
provisions of NBFC Directions on acceptance of public deposits.
scheduled commercial banks appointed for the purpose as a designated banker as per the
(ii) Deposit the bank FDRs or government securities as the case may be with one of the
FDRs) in an escrow account in FDRs of one of the scheduled commercial banks or alternatively
return promised to the depositors and the expected yield on the government  securities/bank
together with the present value of future interest differential ( to be calculated on the basis of the
i) The companies shall keep an amount equivalent to the amount of outstanding public deposits (
The escrow account facility to NBFCs will be subject to the following conditions :
in an escrow account subject to certain conditions.
(between the yield on investments and the obligation of the company to pay the rate of interest)
outstanding public deposits together with the present value of future interest differentials
presently holding public deposits will be allowed to park an amount equivalent to the amount of
The Reserve Bank of India today announced that non-banking financial companies (NBFCs)
to exit from Public Deposits
Escrow Account Facility for NBFCsrepay public deposits and they have chosen to raise resources through other means so as to exit
(Alpana Killawala)
Press Release : 1998-99/1287
General Manager
view to protecting the interest of depositors.
deposits, the Reserve Bank has extended the escrow account facility to such companies with a
from the regulatory attention of the Reserve Bank to the companies accepting/holding public
have not given their consent for taking premature payment. Since the companies have opted to