July 29, 1999
The High Level Working Group set up under the chairmanship of 
satellite dealers, with the exception of a few were found to be Y2K ready. The Group desired
95 commercial banks. The Group recommended that banks should have dry runs of their
contingency plans in simulated environment and 
pose any business continuity problem.
that such a declaration would come in the way of smooth transition to the Year 2000.
Y2K preparations in power, 
institutions in June http://www.rbi.org.in . In this
information on their Y2K preparedness as widely as possible to further confidence about
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/146
Governor reviewed the progress in Y2K preparedness by the banking and financial sectors.
Press 
business continuity.
context, the Group urged that infrastructure and corporate sector should disseminate
1999 which is available on RBI web site 
The Reserve Bank has issued an update on Y2K preparedness in banks and financial
discussions held at major metropolitan cities.
telecommunication and other infrastructure sectors at recent
The members were also kept apprised of the feedback that the Reserve Bank received on the
for the purpose of Y2K preparatory arrangements was considered at the meeting. It was felt
The question regarding declaration of January 1 and January 3, 2000 as exceptional holidays
institutions not yet found to be Y2K ready will soon become compliant and are not likely to
contingency plans in simulated environment. The invitees also assured the Group that those
of compliance in their respective spheres, including the formulation and dry runs of
SEBI and NABARD appraised the members of the level The special invitees from IDBI, LIC, 
contingency plan to the minimum.
of their main systems are in place in the event of failure so as to cut the duration to operate
vendors during the transition period. Banks would have to also ensure that the recovery plans
ensure availability of resource persons and
in an expeditious manner. The Group also took note of the receipt of contingency plans from
that it is necessary to interact on individual basis with each of the non-compliant institutions
banks, non-banking subsidiaries of commercial banks, financial institutions, primary and
IDBI and NABARD. The review showed that all the commercial Executives of LIC, SEBI, 
Apart from the members of the Working Group, the meeting was attended by Senior
, Deputy S.P.Talwar Shri 
Status of Y2K Compliance in Financial Sector