RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
EXCHANGE CONTROL DEPARTMENT
CENTRAL OFFICE
MUMBAI 400 001
A.D.( M.A. Series)Circular No.3 January 9, 1999
To
Authorised Dealers in Foreign Exchange
Dear Sirs,
Release of exchange for higher studies abroad
Attention of authorised dealers is drawn to item XVI of Part A of Annexure I to Chapter
8 of Exchange Control Manual regarding release of exchange for studies abroad.  It has been
and  introduce the following changes with
immediate effect.  The other terms and conditions would, however, remain unchanged.
 Authorised dealers have been permitted to release exchange upto U.S.$ 30,000 per
annum on production of a suitable documentary evidence indicating the actual
requirement of the student.  Sometimes the letter of confirmed admission received by the
student does not indicate the estimate of exchange requirements.  In such cases
upto U.S.$ 15,000 to the student for first six
months and necessary adjustments may be made while releasing exchange for subsequent
period on the basis of documentary evidence produced by the student in this regard.
 In cases where the student is in receipt of full sponsorship from a close relative, he will
 If the student is in receipt of scholarship abroad, the amount thereof may be adjusted
 
overseas institution.  Authorised dealer should take an undertaking from the student that
in the event of his not joining the course he would obtain the admissible refund and
 In terms  of item (c) under the caption "Quantum of exchange" authorised dealers have
been advised, among other things, that tuition fees should be remitted by means of a draft
issued in the name of the overseas university/educational institution.  It would now be in
order for authorised dealers to release entire amount of exchange in favour of the student
concerned.  The amount of exchange to be released in the form of currency notes and
cheques should be restricted to U.S.$ 500 and U.S.$ 1,500 respectively as
hitherto.
2. The following consequential amendments may be carried out in the Exchange Control
(i) Item (ii)(v) in paragraph 8A.1 may be deleted.
Manual.applicant.
Volume I
travellers 
v)
repatriate it to India.
Deposit towards advance tuition fees/maintenance may be remitted if insisted upon by the iv)
against the amount of exchange admissible to him only to the extent desired by the
iii)
be eligible for full exchange, if he desires not to avail of the relative's hospitality.
ii)
authorised dealers may release exchange 
i)
decided to simplify the application Form TRS 
All  Item XVI of Part A of Annexure I to Chapter 8 may be substituted as per Slip 1.
Form TRS may be substituted as per Slip 2.
3. Authorised dealers may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their
constituents concerned.
4. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Section 73(3) of the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973) and any contravention or non-observance
thereof is subject to the penalties prescribed under the Act.
Yours faithfully
B. MAHESHWARAN
Chief General Manager
Slip 1
[AD/MA 3/1999]
Studies Abroad
Application :
Following categories of students are eligible for release of exchange for studies abroad provided
articleship from a firm of Chartered Accountants in U.K.
( Students holding Indian passports
Students holding foreign passports dependent on their parents resident in India.
Notes A.
gone abroad without availing exchange facilities from India for the
remaining duration of the course.
Exchange may also be released to students for continuing the same course
for which exchange was released earlier or for any other course at the
same or any other educational institution.
Duration of Course :
The actual duration of the course.
Quantum of exchange :
(a) U.S.$ 30,000 per annum towards tuition fees, maintenance expenses, books etc.  Exchange
in excess of U.S.$ 30,000 (at actuals) may be released to the extent of the requirement of
exchange indicated in the letter from the overseas institution.  If the student is in receipt of
B.
Exchange facilities may be made available to eligible students who had :
(ii)
i)
they have secured admission to an overseas university/college/educational institution or an
Eligibility :
Form TRS.
XVI.
Volume II
(ii)scholarship, the amount thereof may be adjusted against the amount of exchange admissible
to him, only to the extent desired by the applicant .
(b) In cases where the student is in receipt of full sponsorship from a close relative, he will be
(c) 
exchange requirements, exchange up to U.S.$ 15,000 may be released subject to adjustment
while releasing further exchange.
(d) Exchange may be released for a period not exceeding one year at a time.
(e) Exchange may be released in the form of currency notes not exceeding U.S.$ 500, and
cheques not exceeding U.S.$ 1,500.  The balance amount may be released in the
form of the draft in favour of the 
going to Russia or other Republics of CIS countries may be released exchange in the form
of currency notes for a period up to one year.
Maintenance of Records, Files, etc . :
Authorised dealers should preserve the case papers duly indexed in student-wise files/folders to
facilitate reference for exchange release for subsequent period and also for the purpose of
internal audit/inspection.
student/the university as desired by the applicant. Students
travellers' 
In case letter of admission from overseas university does not indicate the estimate of
eligible for full exchange, if he desires not to avail of the relative's hospitality.