25 Aug 1999 
 
 
International Financial Architecture: Developing Countries' Perspectives 
 
th
(49 Anniversary Lecture - Central Bank of Sri Lanka) 
• Reserve Bank Governor calls for reform of 
IMF/World Bank  
• There is need to correct imbalances in 
representation of developing countries  
• Contingent IMF facility must operate on 
objective criteria  
• Reform and strengthening of Financial 
System is a must  
• India's external sector policy has been 
sound and debt management satisfactory  
• Dr.Bimal Jalan highlights India's active role 
in International Financial Architecture 
Debate 
In a wide ranging review of the current debate on International Financial Architecture, the 
Governor of Reserve Bank, Dr.Bimal Jalan has called for a review of the voting structure of the 
th
IMF and World Bank. Dr. Jalan was delivering the 49 Anniversary Lecture of the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka in Colombo on August 25, 1999. Highlighting the imbalance in the voting structure of 
these institutions, he said, 'it is one of the ironies of the last forty years that although developing 
countries, as a group, have grown much faster than the developed countries over this period and 
their relative economic strength in terms of output and trade has increased substantially, their 
actual voting power in Bretton Woods institutions has tended to decline! This needs to be 
corrected in the next round of Quota exercises in the IMF and capital increase in the World Bank.' 
Deliberating on the 'over-arching issues' that needed to be kept in view in the arrangements for 
financial co-operation in the new millennium, Governor noted that some general agreement on 
the principles that should guide efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the international financial 
institutions (IFIs) had already been reached. These included arrangements to enhance 
accountability, an inclusive process that facilitates a broad range of countries and other 
institutions, and a more participative and open decision making process. While welcoming the 
increased participation of developing countries in these discussions, Governor stressed that 'an 
important consideration that the international community must pay attention to is the hard reality 
that these new arrangements cannot operate successfully without equal partnership between 
developed and developing countries, or between capital surplus and capital borrowing countries'. 
India has been involved in almost all discussions where developing countries have been 
represented, including the G-22 sponsored by USA and G-33 sponsored by G-7, and an effort 
has been made by our representatives to present India's and developing countries' perspective 
on various issues. In the context of the role of the official sector in forestalling a debt crisis, Dr. Jalan remarked that 
the evolution of the Contingent Credit Line (CCL) would depend on how flexibly the eligibility 
criteria in the new IMF facility was operated in practice. He felt that for success of the scheme, 'it 
seems necessary to ensure that performance criteria are in fact appropriate and objective so that 
there is no room for subjectivity or introduction of political and other non-economic 
considerations. The scheme is likely to succeed in avoiding potential problems only if it is 
operated in a more or less automatic way subject to certain predetermined quantitative and 
objective criteria being satisfied by the country'. 
On IMF's role in capital account liberalisation, Dr Jalan said that each country would need to 
decide on its won path of such liberalisation with regard to the timing and sequencing. This in turn 
was likely to depend to a large extent upon the extent of stability and institutional structure of the 
domestic financial sector. Taking all these factors into account, at this juncture, he felt that 'it did 
not seem necessary to embark on a time-consuming procedure for amendment of IMF's Articles 
in order to promote capital account liberalisation'. At the present time, a constructive consultative 
process between the IMF and member countries on these issues should be adequate to achieve 
the objectives in view. 
While briefly reviewing the different exchange rate regimes, Governor observed that the growing 
consensus in most countries seemed to be in favour of a flexible and floating rate regime. 
However, he maintained that 'while there is also acceptance of the hard reality that the degree of 
flexibility has to be managed in order to avoid undue volatility and panic, there is as yet no 
consensus on the modalities and the rules, which govern such managed flexibility'. He cited the 
examples of central bank interventions by industrial countries and the current debate on Yen-
Dollar and Euro-Dollar exchange rates to illustrate the difficulties in framing hard-and-fast rules 
concerning exchange rate management. Developed countries, and in particular the central banks 
of major financial centres, were in a position to intervene in the exchange market on behalf of 
each other. However, such options were not available to most developing countries. This 
imposed additional challenges to the central banks both in tactics of intervention in the forex 
markets and the need for supplementary monetary and other measures. 
Moving on to the Indian economy's performance in some of these areas, Governor said that 
India's policy on keeping external borrowings, particularly short-term borrowings under limits had 
been vindicated by the current international consensus on the need for controlling short-term 
debt. India had cautiously but systematically moved, over a period of time, from a comprehensive 
control regime to current account convertibility and market determined exchange rate. The capital 
account had been so managed as to ensure growth with stability, while consistently adding to our 
foreign currency reserves. Dr. Jalan believed that the policy of cautious movement towards 
capital account liberalisation that had been adopted continued to be valid. 
Touching upon the exchange rate policy in India, the RBI Governor stated that the exchange rate 
of the rupee was largely determined by the market, i.e. demand and supply conditions. The 
objective of exchange rate management had been to ensure that the external value of the rupee 
was realistic and credible as evidenced by a sustainable current account deficit and manageable 
foreign exchange situation. Subject to this predominant objective, the exchange rate policy was 
guided by the need to reduce excess volatility, prevent the emergence of destabilising speculative 
activities, help maintain adequate level of reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange 
market. The Indian market, like other developing countries markets, was not yet very deep and 
broad, and was characterized by uneven flow of demand and supply over different periods. The 
market was also characterised by a few major players, and lumpy public sector demands, 
particularly on account of payments for oil imports and servicing of public debt. In this situation, 
the Reserve Bank of India had been prepared to make sales and purchases of foreign currency in 
order to even out lumpy demand and supply in the relatively thin forex market. However, a 
predetermined target or band around the exchange rate did not govern such intervention. In India, financial sector reforms were started in the early stages of economic reform. As a result 
of measures taken in the past few years, the adoption of prudential norms relating to capital 
adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioning standards and valuation of 
investment portfolio in India are now close to international best practices, Governor said. Asset-
liability management was being put place in the banking system. Supervisory practices by the 
Reserve Bank of India had been closely patterned on the lines of the BIS Core Principles of Bank 
Supervision. However, Dr. Jalan was categorical that there was a lot more work that needed to be 
done in order to make our financial system deeper and more vibrant. 
Finally, Governor said that for the developing countries, including countries in our region, it was of 
utmost importance that highest priority was accorded to strengthen our banking and financial 
systems and bring them up to best international standards. In the changing world scenario, the 
role of financial intermediaries in mobilising and allocating domestic savings as well as external 
capital had become crucial. He drew attention to the East-Asian crisis which also demonstrated 
the vital importance of financial institutions in sustaining the momentum of growth and 
development. It was no longer possible for developing countries to delay the introduction of 
strong prudential and supervisory norms, and introduce structural reforms in order to make the 
financial system more competitive, more transparent and more accountable. 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager 
Press Release : 1999-2000/287 
 