January 12, 1999
the tenderers. The authorised dealers can accept such foreign exchange without asking for further
safeguards prescribed for credits into non-resident accounts.
 The Reserve Bank has also asked the authorised dealers in foreign exchange to accept cash
the normal safeguards which they take against tender of forged or stolen traveller cheques. The
Reserve Bank has in fact also indicated that the banks may even fix higher limits than those
Display current exchange rates
available at their branches and no encashment is refused on account of non-availability of current
rates of conversion. To ensure this, the banks have been asked to put in place a speedy and
asked to prominently display in their premises the rates and other charges along with rules for
Background
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank had, in 1994, permitted residents (individuals, shops,
followed by banks and varying limits upto which the encashment was allowed by these banks.
The Reserve Bank has issued the present fresh instructions to authorised dealers after reviewing
travellers cheques and foreign currency notes. This was largely on account of different practices
non-resident Indians visiting India, however, some time experience difficulties in encashing
lawful obligations fearlessly encash such amounts through banking channels. The tourists and
residents who receive such funds in foreign currency notes/travellers cheques in settlement of
Bank endeavour in permitting residents to receive payment in foreign currency was to encourage
who are on a visit to India for service rendered or in settlement of local obligations. The Reserve
hotels, etc.) to receive payment in foreign currency notes/travellers cheques from the persons
rates the cost of funds that would be required to be deployed in offering such service.
encashment and brand name of travellers cheques accepted. The banks are free to load into the
rate for conversion. The bank branches authorised to deal in foreign exchange have also been
current rates through a link branch is not feasible, bank branches should use the latest available
from the next link branch where necessary and in exceptional circumstances, if obtaining the
efficient system. According to the RBI instructions, the bank branches should obtain the rates
The Reserve Bank has further asked the banks to ensure that the latest exchange rates are
prescribed by the RBI for such cash payments.
500 or its equivalent, while accepting such cash payments, however, authorised dealers may take
major towns. For smaller towns, the authorised dealers in foreign exchange may accept upto US$
payment at least to the extent of US$ 1,000 or its equivalent per transaction in tourist centres and
Accept Cash Payment
documentation or enquiry into the source of instruments provided they follow the normal
visiting India where the proceeds are to be credited to the resident and non-resident accounts of
unlimited foreign currency notes/travellers cheques from tourists and non-resident Indians
The Reserve Bank of India has directed all authorised dealers in foreign exchange to accept
exchange for India tourists : RBI tells banks
Facilitate currency/travellers chequesthe entire procedure in consultation with Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India
(FEDAI).
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1998-99/919
Press 