June 19, 1999
thus, be the backbone for transmission of messages, information, 
Shri S P Talwar, Deputy Governor, 
funded by the Reserve Bank of India as an autonomous 
The Indian Financial Network (INFINET) is a satellite based communication network for
a closed user group of banking and financial sector. Set up by the Reserve Bank of 
in the form of a satellite based Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) network to start
with, this network operates in the extended C-Band and will have about 450 VSATs.
Delivery Vs Payment (DVP), government transactions, automatic clearing house (ACH),
network. Plans are afoot to connect about 18 major business centers through high-speed
Explaining the background for 
provided for speedier and more secure communication modes than the traditional
terrestrial modes. Talwar mentioned 
utilise the best of leading edge technology to enable the banking sector to
achieve international standards. He hoped that with the 
banks, would be eased to a great extent.
one of the biggest bottlenecks of the present times, namely the lack of connectivity of
operationalisation of INFINET,
commitment to 
that  the INFINET stood for the Reserve Bank's Shri 
need speedier funds flow and safer channels for its transmission. Satellite technology
payment system, the Deputy Governor stated that as the economic activity grew, it would
going into VSAT based technology for the country's
availability and accessibility.
drawing from the strengths of each other. Their deployment will depend on suitability,
terrestrial links. Both, VSAT and the terrestrial network of the INFINET will co-exist by
etc. It will, in course of time, be a blend of VSAT technology and high-speed terrestrial
bank  applications, such as, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System, mainly to inter-
INFINET is going to be the payment systems backbone in the county which will cater
India
research in banking technology.
centre for development and
Hyderabad in 1996. The institute is fully IDRBT was set up by Reserve Bank of India at 
Hyderabad today. Banking Technology (IDRBT) at 
inaugurating the INFINET network at the Institute for Research and Development in
Reserve Bank of India. He was This was stated by 
entire banking sector in the country.
data and funds for the
much-required fillip in enabling information flow across branches of banks and would,
efficient and speedy payment and settlement system. The INFINET would give the
Reserve Bank is, therefore, moving inexorably towards the goal of providing an effective,
systems would soon become a major focal point of policy deliberations in India. The
regulation and supervision of electronic payment systems. The design, management, 
The Reserve Bank of India has given high priority to bringing about efficient payment
A satellite based communication network for financial sector
RBI Deputy Governor Inaugurates INFINET -Focussing on the current scenario in the banking industry, the Deputy Governor stated
service. Banks, therefore, had devoted considerable attention to the processes that help
their products to be acceptable. Technology provided the key to such processes.
sites of the public sector banks. 
the network and as more institutions join the INFINET User Group. The demand for
network. It would, therefore, be necessary to eventually get a whole transponder to be
allocated for purposes of networking, he argued.
operationalised, the INFINET would help
customer service all around. He pointed out that provision of a 
utilisation of the INFINET, 
of bank branches as also, 
application softwares throughout the banking 
INFINET would give impetus to bank 
would help not only in speedier funds transfer but also help speedier information flows .
which would result in better supervision, monitoring at the level of controlling offices,
cities of India should be brought under total 
computerised branches to their service branches,
treasury/ funds 
utilisation of funds and connectivity to controlling
time environment.
70 per cent of banking business would have the advantage of access to an on-line real
complete, and with inter-bank connectivity being provided by the INFINET, more than
putting in place such intra-bank hierarchical networks. Once intra-bank connectivity was
offices would aid in empirical decision making. All banks should, therefore, aim at
department would ensure optimal 
departments and controlling offices. Connectivity to treasury/ funds
The next step would be to link all 
computerisation as expeditiously as possible.
According to the Deputy Governor, all major bank branches in commercial important
and decision making at the corporate level.
utilisation of funds, VSAT technology While interconnectivity would ensure optimal 
and to interface with the banking system. This in turn would help in better housekeeping.
computerisation to cover bulk of banking business
industry  would be imperative. The
standardisation of hardware, operating systems, platforms and
computerisation only a beginning. For effective and optimal 
country-wide network is
reporting of government account transactions, flow of government funds and improve
optimise the funds flow management by banks, aid decision making, enable faster
The Deputy Governor hoped that when fully 
communication bandwidth would increase as the users find the immense utility of the
on INSAT 2B would need to be expanded as user institutions place more applications on
Governor added that the one-eighth of transponder space allocated on extended C-band
would be limited by the constraint of the transponder space allocation, the Deputy
Mentioning that for the present, the use of the network
Department of the Reserve Bank, at the Ministry of Finance in New Delhi and at selected
the first phase, VSAT have been installed in all the sixteen offices of the Banking
The Deputy Governor gave the broad details of the INFINET project and stated that in
very convincingly articulated their needs. They appreciate prompt and value-added
the banking industry. Customers, on their part, had also become sophisticated and had
entities at affordable costs was the driving force behind the current heightened activity in
that the need to provide first class service to customers of banks and other financialThe Deputy Governor also envisaged the usage of the INFINET backbone for
information exchange between banks. Credit information on borrowers’ accounts, for
Information that was essential for management to take decisions, the Reserve bank
guides, circulars, etc
quickly over the INFINET. Transmission of data for warehousing purposes and for the
In his key-note address, Dr. A. 
pointed out that the INFINET clearly gets the distinction of being a forerunner of an
effect credits to accounts of customers situated anywhere within the reach of the ECS
minimise
Electronic Funds Transfer, 
the Centralised Funds Enquiry System (CFES) for banks maintaining current accounts
with the Reserve Bank and ultimately to the establishment of a Real Time Gross
Settlement System for the country. INFINET, Dr. 
Dr finalisation of the message formats for inter-
standardised for use
across banks, message transfers for a wide variety of applications that take place between
efficiently and quickly. This may also open up
facilities for Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) between banks and their constituents and
Earlier, Dr. V P 
technology  and the
INFINET project. He stated that the 
sector. He stated that the Institute would be the instrument for development and adoption
of technologies in the banking sector. Its major focus would be on research, 
Dr. 
instance, could be shared among banks to their mutual advantage, he pointed out.
actively involved with Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai on a collaborative project
Authority, data mining for the analysis of credit card transactions. The Institute was
projects in the area of computer based training, certification management by Certification
Gulati informed that the institute had already undertaken a number of research
and education activities.
development
promotion of technology solution to improve the functioning of the banking and financial
IDRBT's mission was to be a think-tank for the
introduction of the role of IDRBT in furthering research in banking 
Gulati, Director, IDRBT welcomed the guests and gave a brief
perhaps pave the way for the introduction of E-Commerce in the country.
banks would take place effectively, 
banks applications was under progress. Once message formats were 
Vasudevan mentioned that work for 
ideal medium for transmission of both messages and funds for the RTGS system.
Vasudevan pointed out, would be an
Centralised Funds Management System (CFMS) comprising
the levels of clearing related reconciliation entries at banks. This could be extended to
would pave the way ultimately for paperless funds transfers and would greatly 
could be one of the applications of INFINET, the Executive Director stated. This, he said,
Electronic Clearing Service (ECS) under which corporate customers at one place could
efficient telecommunications backbone for the banking and financial sector. Inter-city
Vasudevan, Executive Director, Reserve bank of India
would provide satisfaction to the ultimate users of banking services.
used. He hoped that all these developments, taking place with the aid of technology,
offices from branches, were some of the areas in which the INFINET could be effectively
requirement of the Reserve Bank for offsite surveillance, information to controlling
tends to take a long duration could get completed very communication which some times 
., could all be transmitted through the INFINET. Inter-bankcalled (SMARS) - 
information technology companies and smart card vendors.
Alapana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1998-99/1589
P.S. S.P. Governor and Dr. A 
www.speeches.rbi.org.in)
website (URL: Director are available on RBI 
Vasudevan, Executive Talwar, Deputy Shri Speeches of 
Press 
SMArt Rupee System along with the Reserve Bank, banks,