May 24, 1999
for providing rupee coins in Andheri (East) through Lions Club of Marol. Coins will be
will be offered on every Wednesday (except holidays). Every individual will be given coins upto
the value of Rs.800, that is 100 coins of each denomination, viz., Re.1, Rs.2 and Rs.5.
Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Issue Department, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001 (Phone No.2663954
- Mobile No.98200-88966 Fax No.2702820).
representative associations/federations. Public service organisation, as also, the members of the
Suburbs. The currency chests are expected to meet the needs of the customers of the banks and
the general public, through the network of their branches.
time as it has offered its services for arranging regular fora for  such inter-action.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/1452
The Reserve Bank also proposes to augment the network of such distribution to other parts of the
Lions Club of Marol at Andheri (East), a voluntary and social service organisation for the first
been exploring various ways of direct distribution of coins. Coins will be distributed through the
In order that the general public can access their coin requirement directly, Reserve Bank has
Greater Mumbai, extending upto Dahisar in the Western suburbs and Mulund in the Central
also been regularly supplying coins to the 49 currency chests of public sector banks in the City of
public are extended this facility on need based requirements. In addition, the Reserve Bank has
its counters. The facility is availed by the trading and business establishments through their
At present, the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, has been providing exchange facility for coins at
interested in organising similar facilities in their area may approach Shri K.V.K.Murthy, General
suburbs of Mumbai under the aegis of voluntary agencies. Those social service organisations
2, Mufaddar, Church Road, Saifee Park, Marol, Andheri (East), Mumbai- 400 059. This facility
distributed on Wednesday, May 26, 1999 from 10.30 A.M. at the premises of the Lions Club at
In a unique effort to reach coins to the public, the Reserve Bank of India has made arrangements
Coins through Lions Club in Andheri
Reserve Bank of India to distribute