RBI announces guidelines for Gold Deposit Scheme
October 5, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India today announced detailed guidelines for the Gold Deposit Scheme. As per the
guidelines, banks authorised by the Reserve Bank to deal in gold and have the required infrastructure for
managing the scheme, expertise/experience in gold business and proper risk management systems may
launch the Gold Deposit Scheme. Each bank will, within the framework set out by the Reserve Bank
guidelines, devise a scheme in accordance with its own assessment of the market. Banks proposing to
introduce a gold deposit scheme will need to take the Reserve Bank approval for introducing the scheme.
It may be recalled that with a view to mobilising a portion of the privately held stock of gold in the country
and putting it to productive use, the Finance Minister had announced the introduction of a Gold Deposit
Scheme in the budget for 1999-2000. The Scheme seeks to provide depositors the opportunity to earn
interest on their idle gold holdings along with the benefits of safety and security of holding gold without
any cost. The Government of India has since issued various enabling notifications.
According to the broad guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank today, the scheme will be open for
investment by resident Indians. Under the scheme, banks will either issue a passbook or a certificate or
bond which will be transferable by endorsement and delivery. Banks will be free to fix their own interest
rates on the gold deposit scheme. The scheme will have maturity range from 3 to 7 years with an initial
lock-in period to be specified by each bank.
Gold under the scheme will be accepted in scrap form only. The banks will first subject the tendered gold
to preliminary assay by a non-destructive method. After the preliminary assay the depositor will have
option to withdraw the tender depending upon the results. The deposit will be repaid in the form of standard
gold bar of 0.995 fineness or in rupees equivalent to the price of gold as on the date of maturity at the
option of the depositor. The depositor will have to exercise the option at the time of application or once
during the tenure of the bond.
Rupee loans will be available against collateral of the gold deposits. The scheme will be open-ended and
will be available on tap. To ensure wide reach for the scheme, banks which fulfil these criteria but have
limited branch network, may appoint other banks having the necessary infrastructure for collection, storage
and transportation of gold as collection agents only.
For the purpose of operation of the scheme, the Reserve Bank/Government have also given certain facilities
to the banks. These include exemption from customs duty for export/import of gold scrap/refined gold,
payment of foreign exchange for refining and such other charges, exemption from cash reserve ratio on the
liabilities under the scheme and to hedge the price risk arising out of gold price movement through forward
contracts, or access international exchanges.
Details of the guidelines for operation of the Scheme are :
Eligibility : Resident Indians (individuals, HUF, trusts, companies) can invest in the scheme. Joint tenders
may be accepted and more than one certificate issued in the case of joint holders.
Issue of passbook/certificate : Under the scheme, banks can either issue a passbook or a certificate/bond
which will be transferable by endorsement and delivery. The banks will ensure to issue the passbook or
certificate for deposit of gold to the depositor within 90 days from the date of receipt of gold. The
passbook/certificate will indicate, inter alia, the name of the depositor/s, quantum of gold deposit in grams,
the date of deposit, the date of maturity and the interest payable on the deposit.
Nomination : The facility will be allowed on the lines of the other usual rupee deposit schemes.
Lock-in Period : There will be an initial lock-in period which will be decided by the banks.Interest Rates : Individual banks will be free to fix the interest rates in tune with their own costing
considerations. Interest will be payable in cash at fixed intervals or at maturity as decided by the bank.
Maturity : The deposits may be made available within a maturity range from three to seven years. Delivery
at maturity will be in standard gold bar form of .995 fineness or in rupees equivalent to the price of gold as
on that date at the option of the depositor, to be exercised at the time of application or once during the
tenure of the bonds.
Premature Payment/Encashment : Premature payment/encashment in cash equivalent to the price of gold as
on the date of encashment or in gold would be allowed after the initial lock-in period. Banks may decide
the penalty/swap cost to be levied on such withdrawals depending on the period for which the deposit has
run.
Loans against Gold Deposits : Rupee loans may be given against collateral of gold deposits.
Operations of the Scheme : The operation of the Scheme will be open-ended, available on tap until further
notice.
Assay : Gold (bars, coins, jewellery, etc.) will be accepted in scrap form only. There will be a preliminary
assay to ascertain gold content/caratage in jewellery by a non-destructive technique such as X-
Ray/karatmeter followed by a fool-proof method like fire assay. The depositor may be given the option to
withdraw the tender depending on the results of the preliminary assay. If the option to withdraw is
exercised, banks may consider levying a nominal charge to defray the cost of preliminary assay. For
assaying, banks may enter into arrangements with existing units, or use the assaying infrastructure being
jointly set up by the designated banks.
Gold Import/Export : For the purpose of the scheme, banks have been allowed to export/import of gold
scrap/refined gold which will be exempt from Customs duty. Banks have also been permitted to make
payment in foreign exchange for refining charges, including cost of insurance, transportation, etc., subject
to Exchange Control regulations.
Deployment of Gold : Banks may deploy gold mobilised under the scheme as gold loans to domestic
jewellery industry, gold loans to jewellery exporters, outright sale of gold domestically, sale of gold to
other nominated banks.
Risk Management by Banks : Banks would be required to put in place suitable risk management
mechanisms to hedge the price risk arising out of gold price movements. Banks are permitted to enter into
forward contracts in India for buying and selling of gold with only those banks which are authorised by the
Reserve Bank to import gold. Banks have also been allowed to access the international exchanges, London
Bullion Market Association or make use of over-the-counter contracts to hedge exposures to bullion prices
subject to the Exchange control regulations. Banks would need to put in place suitable accounting systems,
internal control and audit mechanisms and disclosure norms to cover all its operations in respect of gold
including the Gold Deposit Scheme.
Reserve Requirements : Authorised banks will be exempted from maintaining the cash reserve ratio on
liabilities under gold deposits mobilised in India. In view of multiple prescriptions, however, banks will
have to maintain a minimum CRR of 3.0 per cent on total net demand and time liabilities (including zero
CRR liabilities). The authorised banks will have to maintain SLR of 25.0 per cent on liabilities under the
gold deposit scheme. It may be noted that under the present law, banks have to maintain a minimum of 25.0
per cent SLR.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1999-2000/474