January 27, 1999
HARMONISING THE ROLE AND THE
OPERATIONS OF DFIs AND BANKS –
A DISCUSSION PAPER
In the light of a number of reform measures adopted in the Indian financial system
since 1991 and keeping in view the need for evolving an efficient and competitive
financial system, the Reserve Bank of India had constituted on December 8, 1997, a
Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri S.H. Khan. The Khan Working Group had
submitted its final report in May 1998.
In its monetary and credit policies announced in April and October 1998, the
Reserve Bank had indicated that a discussion paper would be prepared which would
contain the Reserve Bank’s draft proposals for bringing about greater clarity in the
respective roles of banks and financial institutions for greater harmonisation of facilities
and obligations applicable to them. An internal group was constituted for this purpose.
The Discussion Paper consists of seven sections. While the introductory section
lists out issues arising out of recommendations of Khan Working Group and those
recommendations of the Narasimham Committee which have a bearing on the issues
considered by it. Section two deals with the concept of ‘universal banking’ and its
advantages and limitations. Section three outlines the practice of universal banking and the
position as it prevails in India. Section four discusses principal issues concerning future
role of development finance institutions ( DFIs) in India with special reference to the state
of the capital market. Section five deals with the various issues concerning 
the role and operations of DFIs and banks in India. Section six discusses the regulatory,
supervisory and related issues. The last section sets out the Reserve Bank’s draft proposals.
The Discussion Paper contains several statements on universal banking practices in
select countries, pre-reform and current status of financial sector in India, various
subsidiaries set up by banks/ FIs, FIs’ ownership, organization and functions and
regulatory/supervisory regimes for banks, DFIs and non-banking financial companies
(
The proposals are bei ng put forward for discussion/ comments by experts,
banks/ FIs, other market participants, and the public in general. Necessary decision will be
taken by the Reserve Bank in the matter, in consultation with the Government, in the light
The draft proposals address three main issues: approach to universal banking,
meeting the long term capital requirements of the corporate sector and the future role of
DFIs. In addition, the issues of regulatory and supervisory framework, and ownership and
organisational structures, which arise out of the main issues are discussed. Besides, two
other issues specially flagged by the recommendations of the Khan Working Group, which
have immediate operational significance, viz., harmonisation and efficiency are also
covered.
1
harmonising
of comments received.
NBFCs).In brief, the discussion paper proposes the following financial architecture for the
future.
First, the approach to universal banking should be guided by international
experience and domestic requirements. The process of enabling the provision of
diversified services both by banks and DFIs either in house or through the subsidiary route
as a conglomerate, should continue  in a gradual and orderly fashion, subject to
appropriate regulation by the Reserve Bank of India.
Second, in terms of institutions, ultimately there should be only banks and re-
structured 
Third, in the meantime, however, the special role of DFIs is recognised and a
transitional path is envisaged for them to become either a full-fledged NBFC or a bank.
Fourth, since banks are special, any conglomerate, in which a bank is present,
should be subject to a consolidated approach to supervision and regulation.
Fifth, a corporate form of organisation under the Companies Act is preferred to
provide the financial intermediaries, necessary flexibility for mergers, acquisition and
Sixth, the supervisory functions are to be delinked from refinance institutions and
brought under a consistent framework.
Seventh, the ownership role should be transferred from the Reserve Bank to the
Government of India, in respect of the financial intermediaries so that there is a focussed
Eighth, the harmonisation in the working of various institutions should be at the
initiatives of the organisations themselves, with the Reserve Bank being available for
guidance and consultation.
Ninth, various efficiency issues pertaining to each organisation have to be
addressed individually by the banks/ DFIs and they are encouraged to deliberate among
The Discussion Paper will be available on the RBI 
( www.rbi.org.in) from 00.00 hrs. of January 28, 1999.
Maureen Shankar
Manager
Release : 1998-99/976
2
Press 
:// :http URL
Website
themselves and take necessary decisions urgently.
attention by the Reserve Bank on its supervisory/regulatory functions.
diversification to meet the needs of the evolving situation.
NBFCs.
albeit