companies (NBFCs) including those having net own fund (NoF) below Rs. 25 lakh
deposits although the return is statutory. The Reserve bank has taken a serious view of
The Reserve bank has cautioned that appropriate penal action, including rejection of their
Further, although the Reserve Bank had
companies also to file a 'Nil' return in order to comply with the provisions of law.
The Reserve Bank has also clarified that the applications of NBFCs having NoF below
During the intervening period, however, they have been precluded from 
public deposits, as also, from renewing such maturing deposits. They should repay such
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/967
they have been given three years' time for attainment of the requisite level of NoF.
the Statutory Return on Liquid Assets on quarterly basis to the Reserve Bank.
deposits as and when they mature. In the meantime, it is obligatory on their part to file
accepting further
Rs.25 lakh for issue of a certificate of registration have been kept in abeyance because
view of the large scale non-compliance of law, it has considered necessary to ask these
earlier clarified that the companies not holding public deposits need not file this return, in
file such returns at the prescribed periodicity. 
taken against the non-compliant companies. The NBFCs have been advised to invariably
application for registration and cancellation of the certificate if already issued, will be
be separately mailing to each NBFC, a format of the return for immediate submission.
comply with the legal provisions. In order to enable them to do so, the Reserve Bank will
The Reserve Bank has, however, decided to give a last opportunity to these companies to
the non-compliance of the law by these NBFCs.
than Rs.25 lakh, have not submitted this return to the Reserve bank despite holding public
It has found that many companies, more particularly the companies having NoF of less
The Reserve Bank has reviewed the position of statutory compliance by such companies.
the prescribed format.
deposits and furnish to the Reserve Bank of India a statutory return on quarterly basis in
holding public deposits to maintain liquid assets as a certain percentage of the public
The provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act require the non-banking financial
to submit Return on Liquid Assets
RBI asks NBFCs holding Public Deposits