under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, S.P. 
development of a modern and efficient Payments and Settlement system for the country was held
1. Dr. A.Vasudevan, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India
2. Shri 
3. Shri Rashid 
4. Dr.R.H.Patil, Managing Director, National Stock Exchange
5. Shri 
6. Shri David P.Conner, Chief Executive Officer-India, 
7. Shri 
8. Shri 
9. Shri D.S.Pendse, Managing Director, 
The meeting was also attended by Shri S.R. Department of
its core.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Chennai, Calcutta and New Delhi.
• Initiation of the process for appointment of a consultant to assist in the implementation of
1.
and Credit Policy for the Year 1999-2000.
2. will be a service provider
India.Selvam, Chairman, Indian Banks Association
between the origin of the transaction and its settlement in the books of the Reserve Bank of
The Council agreed to the adoption of Y-topology, viz., there 
of 15 to 18 months as stipulated by the Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the Monetary
emphasised the introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement System within a time frame It 
The Council took the following decisions after a discussion on each of the above initiatives:
Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS).
the four metropolitan cities viz., Mumbai, 
Replacement of MICR solutions with the state-of-the-art Y2K compliant clearing systems at
Design of the Message formats for the identified applications;
Standardisation of Message Formats;
Scheduling the implementation of the identified inter-bank applications on the INFINET;
Operationalisation of the Indian Financial Network - INFINET;
last 10-12 months. These initiatives included, among others, the following:
Systems Advisory Committee of the Reserve Bank, and appreciated the initiatives taken in the
The council reviewed the work already done by the Payment Systems Group and the Payment
and settlements system for the country, with the proposed Real Time Gross Settlement System as
policy parameters for designing and developing an integrated, state of the art, robust payments
The National Payment Council was constituted on May 26, 1999 with the focus on the broad
Information Technology as the Member-Secretary of the Council.
Mittal, Chief General Manager, 
Tata Finance Ltd.
Gahrotra, Senior Executive Director, Securities and Exchanges Board of India O.P. 
H.N.Sinor, Managing Director, ICICI Banking Corporation Ltd.
Citi Bank
V.Janakiraman, Deputy Managing Director, State Bank of India
Jilani, Chairman and Managing Director, Punjab National Bank
A.T.Panir 
on July 22, 1999, in Mumbai. The members who attended the meeting included:
Talwar to guide the design and Shri 
The first meeting of the National Payments Council constituted by the Reserve Bank of India
National Payments Council3.
Centre, Mumbai, as the gateway to RTGS.
4. Upgradation
in the Banking Sector. 
priority basis in co-ordination with the Chairmen of Banks and Heads of the Computer
5.
The Council was of the view that it is necessary to reduce time lags in the collection of
in  an
expeditious manner.
6. The Council constituted a number of permanent Task forces. Each Task Force would be
headed 
Heads of the Departments concerned within the Reserve Bank.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Systems and Procedures related issues
7. The Council strongly recommended that all applications should be 
RTGS should be operated without human intervention in a secured environment once the
8. The Council decided that it should meet once in a quarter to deliberate on issues of
Rupambara Padhi
Manager
Release : 1999-2000/114
Press 
immediate and institutional importance.
message is received at the gateway.
standardised and that
Payments Council in its policy making.
The Task Forces will study the various issues connected with the above and assist the National
Technology Related Issues;
Legal Issues;
Payment and Settlement Systems Oversight;
Monetary Policy and related issues;
by  a member of the National Payments Council and assisted by the respective
undertaken about the measures that could be taken to address this problem 
cheques. The Council suggested that a detailed study be outstation as well as local 
The Council felt that all payment and settlement systems should be of service to customers.
Policy and Planning Departments.
Those which are of immediate nature should be implemented on a
The Council endorsed the recommendations of the Committee on Technology 
solution available at National Clearing 
The Council also agreed to the use of the Y2K complaint state of the art technology