March 30, 1999
Background
In order to facilitate participation by Non-resident Indians (NRIs)/Persons of Indian
Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India have provided a number of
special facilities to them. Procedures for availing of such facilities have also been
simplified from time to time. As a result, the requirement for NRIs to apply and seek
specific permission from the Reserve Bank for each financial transaction or
The Reserve Bank of India has now decided to carry this process forward, and to
further simplify financial transactions by NRIs/PIOs as indicated below. After these
A. Facility of opening of Non-Resident(Special)
Rupee Accounts with banks in India
residents. 
accounts of resident individuals. This scheme will become effective from April 15,
1999. The existing facilities for NRIs/PIOs to maintain and operate Non-Resident
(Ordinary) i.e., NRO account, 
facilities available under these accounts will continue as before.
 To facilitate various other transactions by
NRIs/PIOs the Reserve Bank has granted general
permissions to :
granted general permission to NRIs/PIOs, for undertaking direct investments in Indian
B.
Currency Non-Resident, i.e., FCNR account will also continue. The repatriation
Non-Resident (External) i.e. NRE account and Foreign
The procedure for opening such accounts will be the same as in the case of domestic
repatriation of funds held in these accounts and/or income/interest earned on them.
are applicable to rupee accounts maintained in India by residents in regard to
Accounts with banks in India which will have the same facilities and restrictions as
They will now be permitted to open Non-Resident (Special) Rupee
open bank accounts in India which will be at par with rupee accounts maintained by
putting through financial transactions in India it has been decided to permit them to
In order to simplify the procedures and to provide greater freedom to NRIs/PIOs for
financial transactions in India subject to certain exchange control regulations.
NRIs/PIOs presently have the facility of maintaining bank accounts and undertaking
New Facilities
are : from time to time with the same ease as residents in India. The changes 
transactions, under approved schemes announced by the Government/Reserve Bank
changes have become effective, NRIs/PIOs will be able to undertake most financial
approved activities under these schemes.
remittances of current income. NRIs/PIOs do not have to seek specific permission for
companies and proprietorship/partnership concerns on non-repatriation basis and for
companies, purchase of shares under Portfolio Investment Scheme, investment in
investment has also been reduced considerably. Thus, the Reserve Bank has already
Origins (PIOs) in India's economic development, over a period of time, the
financial transactions by Non-resident Indians
Reserve Bank further simplifies facilities for To 
from abroad or out of funds held in their bank accounts in India, on non-
points.
 
organisations subject to compliance with
other applicable rules/regulations including the provisions of Foreign
organisation
concerned.
 
to, among other 
Aviation has been obtained.
 
NRIs/PIOs/OCBs on both repatriation as well as non-repatriation basis.
 
on both repatriation and non-repatriation basis.
 
on stock exchanges in India.
in shares and debentures under the portfolio scheme.
Taking into account the facilities that are already available, and the above new
will not have to seek specific permission of the Reserve
should considerably reduce paper work and time taken for undertaking such
transactions.
business.
Maureen 
Manager
Press Release: 1998-99/1223
Shankar
primarily relate to investment by them in real estate/agriculture and plantation
residents, will NRIs/PIOs/OCBs will not be the same as available to domestic 
After the above changes come into effect, the areas in which facilities available to
Bank for a whole variety of approved financial/investment transactions. This
measures, NRIs/PIOs 
Government Securities and treasury bills while granting permission for investment
The Reserve Bank will grant general permission to NRIs/PIOs/OCBs to invest in
NRIs/PIOs/OCBs for sale of shares acquired under direct investment Schemes vi)
basis and with Indian companies including Non-banking financial companies
NRIs/PIOs/OCBs to place deposits with Indian firms, on non-repatriation v)
All domestic public/private sector mutual funds for issue of Units to iv)
conditions, that the approval of the Director General of Civil
NRIs/OCBs for investment on repatriation basis in Air Taxi operations subject iii)
Contribution Regulations Act, 1976 by the charitable trust/
India to registered charitable trusts/
and to PIOs to transfer by way of gift immovable property held by them in
NRIs/PIOs to transfer by way of gift shares held by them in Indian companies ii)
of interest on such loans should not exceed Bank Rate plus two percentage
repatriation basis, subject to certain conditions one of them being that the rate
interest bearing rupee loans from NRIs/PIOs out of funds remitted by them
resident  individuals, partnership/proprietorship concerns to avail of i)