August 31, 1999
The High Level Working Group constituted by the Reserve Bank of India under the
Chairmanship of S.P. 
August 31, 1999. The representatives of the Ministry of Finance and Department of
Electronics, Government of India 
of the policy issues that are relevant for the 
appreciation of the fact that all commercial banks have reported to the Reserve Bank of their
full Y2K compliance. The members of the Group were apprised of the fact that barring two
actions in the event of Y2K disruption.
operation from the last week of December. The Group has also urged the banks to have a
operations are computerised.
The Group agreed that it is prudent to have a core Y2K Solution Group at the banks and core
centres should be established in all RBI offices and in banks as
expeditiously as possible for information sharing and communication link up with various
sectors of the economy and the rest of the World.
Centre Mumbai, Effective August 21, 1999. It
was tested and found Y2K ready. As the file structure continues to be the same as in the past,
centres and 
The Group also desired that while the Y2K compliant clearing would reduce the need for
on a collateralised basis in line with best international practices for a temporary period of 2
added that the banks which do not have enough government securities for purposes of
entities to meet any eventualities of unexpected demand for funds.
collateralisation would be encouraged to enter into standby arrangements with other financial
months from December 1, 1999 at a rate of 250 basis points over the Bank Rate. He also
Chairman of the Group announced that the RBI on its part is willing to provide such support
unanticipated demand for funds during the period of change over to new Millenium. The
liquidity to a considerable extent, the Reserve Bank may extend liquidity support to meet any
Chests. The Reserve Bank of India has already issued instructions to its Offices on the matter.
confidence by having adequate inventory of cash at all Reserve Bank Offices and Currency
On the policy related issues the Group was of the view that it is necessary to build public
operationalised soon. would be replicated in the other 3 metropolitan 
also rendered Y2K compliant. The Group has also been informed that the same IBM System
the interface of the clearing system with the commercial banks which is presently off line is
IBM S/390 System at the National Clearing 
The Group has been informed of the installation of the state of the art of the Y2K compliant
that event management 
Y2K staff in all the offices where critical applications are in place. The Group also agreed
clear cut "leave policy" for the staff and officers of the banks working in the areas were
The Group agreed that banks should test the contingency plans frequently and put them into
of the contingency plan has revealed that each bank should observe a critical minimum of
banks all the scheduled commercial banks have already prepared contingency plans. A study
millenium change. There was a general
There was also discussion of the criticality of clearing and settlement systems in the context
were also present during the meeting.
readiness and contingency planing of the banking and financial sector in a meeting held on
Talwar, Deputy Governor reviewed the status of Year 2000 Shri 
Meeting of the High Level Working Group on Y2K Related Issuesrecognised it is still necessary to have wide disclosures from individual banks. If required,
these should be placed on the 
1999 in early September 1999.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/325
would come out with an update on Y2K readiness of the financial sector as of end August
Press 
website and such other public domains. The Reserve Bank
The Group is of the view that while the financial sector year 2000 readiness is widely