They reflect the research efforts of the
in
,  the improvement is not so impressive for the long-term relationship. This points to
of  the study suggests thatIndia : An Empirical
of any one interest rate in not dominated by the movements of other interest rates. The presence
the absence of a unique common trend among interest rates implies that the long run movement
(iv) redemption yield on long term GOI dated securities. The results 
short term 91 day Treasury Bills, (iii) cut off yield on medium term 364 day Treasury Bills, and,
term structure of interest rates (i) very short term inter-bank call money rate, (ii) cut off yield on
The study has chosen the following employing the cointegration and common trends analysis. 
regularities of relationship among various interest rates in government securities market
the term structure of interest rates in the Indian economy in order to identify the possible
Securities Market in India" by Himanshu Joshi attempts to undertake an empirical assessment of
The third article of the volume "Liquidity Effects on the Term Structure of Government
obsolete in view of the rising importance of interest rate and asset price channels.
transmission of monetary policy, in so far as the quantum channel is becoming increasingly
markets and their sensitivity to monetary policy. This has significant implications for the
directions, nevertheless shows an encouraging sign of the growing maturity of the financial
overseas financial markets is not robust. The movement of various interest rates in uniform
the integration of money and forex market in India. However integration of domestic and
market is least integrated with the rest of the financial  sector. There are early indications about
money market, credit market, Government securities market since April 1993. However, capital
financial markets are getting increasingly integrated at the short-end of the market, such as,
emerge as a reference rate in  the Indian financial market. The paper also finds that India's
achieved operational efficiency. It shows that the 91-day Treasury Bill rate has the potential to
competitive environment is yet to emerge in India, several segments of the financial market have
financial markets in the post-liberalisation period. The paper points out that although a fully
Evaluation' by B.K. Bhoi and S.C. Dhal empirically evaluates the degree of integration of India's
The second article of this volume 'Integration of Financial Markets in 
role in  the recent divergence in the relationship between CPIIW and WPI.
other factors such as price quotations, differences in market behaviours, etc.,  which may have a
and WPI
commodity basket and weighting pattern improves the short-run relationship between CPIIW
Empirical results of the paper indicate that while removal of sources of divergence due to
in  two price indices, there are also other factors which are at work in giving rise to this outcome.
divergence is explained by the differences in commodity basket and weighting pattern inherent
CPIIW and notes that the two series diverged noticeably since May 1995. While a part of this
Index for Industrial Workers (CPIIW). The study examines the divergence between WPI and
and long-run relationship between the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and the Consumer Price
India - A Statistical Exploration' by G.P. Samanta and Sharmishtha Mitra explores the short-run
The first article of this volume 'Recent Divergence between wholesale and Consumer Prices 
authors and their personal views.
research articles, two notes and three book reviews. 
The  December1998 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers (OPs) contains three
December 1998 Issue
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers -Sunando Roy attempts to provide an overview of Prof.Amartya Sen's contributions
market. The note stresses the need for addressing certain policy and institutional issues in
on  a fixed rate basis. The note adds that given the current structure of
Alpana 
Release : 1998-99/1252 Press 
General Manager
Killawala
forward rate agreements and interest rate swaps first before moving on to options.
undertaken in a gradual manner. A suggested sequencing pattern could be to develop market for
the Indian Rupee money market and its characteristics, introduction of derivatives should be
loan and extending loans 
term money market are improving the flexibility of banks to fix PLR across the term structure of
term money market. Some of the other suggestions emerging from the study for developing a
and also offer two-way quotes in the market. This would act as a catalyst for development of a
contribute to the evolvement of an ALM  system which would help banks lend on  a term basis
practice of ALM system among banks. The recent RBI guidelines on ALM are expected to
The study observes that a major reason for the lack of term money market is the absence of the
tenure as a precondition.
use of derivatives will require the existence of a term money market for six month to one-year
market for forward rate agreement and allowing interest rate swaps. The note argues that active
such as strips and Asset Backed Securities, introduction of credit-default swaps, developing the
encouraging Revolving Underwriting Facility (RUF), introduction of asset-based derivatives
suggestions provided by the note include, among others, development of the repo market,
developing a market for risk-taking, risk sharing and risk-diversification in India. The
examines the importance of risk management exercise for the participants in Indian financial
The note on "Managing Financial Risk in India - A Note" by Shyamala Gopinath and A. Prasad
belief in the democratic state.
Sen, including his concerns for egalitarianism, the centrality of human freedom and a strong
perspective. the note attempts to identify the forces that unite the diverse world of Prof. Amartya
contributions of Prof.Sen in the areas of poverty, famine and social inequality in a proper
dimensions and his concerns for gender inequality. The note has placed many significant
highlights Prof, Sen's penetrating analysis of the economics of inequality in its various
Sen's work in welfare economics in the context of the growth of modern public choice theory. It
concepts of development and economic reforms and liberalisation. The note analyses Amartya
economics and social choice theory, economic inequality and poverty, famines and hunger,
to economics. The review looks at the major contributions of Prof.Amartya Sen in welfare
Review" by 
Amartya  Sen - A The present issue also contains two notes. The note titled "The Economics of 
by the Central Bank could be of crucial importance in facilitating market integration.
and/or economic fundamentals. Finally, the results also suggest that structural policies pursued
possibility of their common response to changes in expectations about future monetary policy
of cointegration, however, suggests a long run interlocking of interest rates across markets and a