August 31, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India has further simplified the procedure for release of exchange to
not
account.
earlier availed exchange facility, he was advised to approach the same authorised dealer that
instalment or for more than one
means of a crossed cheque/demand draft/pay order.
Whom to approach
 
 
 
 
Duration
which they had availed of exchange earlier or for taking up any other course of studies.
Students for continuing a course at the same or any other educational institution, for  (iv)
remaining duration of the course) or for taking up new course of studies;
Students who had gone abroad without availing exchange facilities from India (for the  (iii)
Students holding foreign passports and dependant on their parents resident in India;  (ii)
Students holding Indian passports;  (i)
institution or an articleship from a firm of Chartered Accountants in U.K:
provided they have secured admission to an overseas university/college/educational
The following categories of students are eligible for release of exchange for studies abroad
Eligibility criteria
Any bank authorised to deal in foreign exchange.
The other details which remain unchanged are :
instalment reckoned together for a single journey/visit the traveller necessarily had to pay by
exchange exceeded Rs.50,000 either for any single 
had earlier released exchange to him. And, where the rupee equivalent for drawing foreign
When a student approached an authorised dealer/branch other than the one from where he had
not exceeding U.S. $ 500 and in the form of travellers' cheques not exceeding U.S. $ 1,500.
They were also required to release exchange for studies abroad in the form of currency notes
the journey commencing not later than sixty days from the date of sale of foreign exchange.
Earlier, authorised dealers were required to ensure that the student-traveller held a ticket for
dealers would insist on demand draft/pay order/crossed cheque drawn on the applicant's bank
of exchange for individual transaction is equivalent to Rs. 50, 000 or more, the authorised
circumstances he will draw exchange exceeding his eligibility. Further, only when the drawal
per his convenience so far as he gives an undertaking in the form TRS that under no
The student also now has the freedom to approach any authorised dealer to draw exchange as
cheques and in the name of the student/educational institution as desired by the applicant.
They can also release exchange in the form of draft/telegraphic transfers and travellers'
 now insist on journey ticket while releasing exchange. dealing in foreign exchange) need 
students for studies abroad. According to the revised procedure, authorised dealers (banks
Release of Exchange to Students for Studies Abroad
RBI simplifies Rules ona) 
exchange admissible to him, only to the extent desired by the applicant.
 
c) 
d) 
e) 
cheques in favour of the student/the educational institution as desired by the applicant.
Documents to be submitted:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Press Release:1999-2000/323
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
purchase of exchange.
transaction, banker's cheque/pay order/demand draft or crossed cheque for payment of
If value of exchange being purchased is equivalent to Rs. 50,000 or more for individual
Documentary evidence indicating the requirement of exchange by the student;
Letter of admission from the overseas university/college/institution with a copy;
Passport for verification and return;
Duly filled in Form A2 (available with authorised dealers);
Application in Form TRS;
exchange in the form of currency notes for a period up to one year.
Students going to Russia or other Republics of CIS countries will be released entire
balance amount will be released in the form of bank draft/telegraphic transfer/travellers'
Exchange will be released in the form of currency notes not exceeding U.S.$ 500. The
institution.
studies abroad for the same course or any other at the same or any other educational
available on production of documentary evidence to show that student is continuing
Exchange will be released for a period of one year at a time. Further exchange will be
dealer subject to adjustment while releasing further exchange.
exchange requirements, exchange up to U.S.$ 15,000 may be released by authorised
In case letter of admission from overseas university does not indicate the estimate of
eligible for full exchange, if the desires not to avail of the relative's hospitality.
In cases where the student is in receipt of full sponsorship from a close relative, he will be b)
student is in receipt of scholarship, the amount may be adjusted against the amount of
of the requirement of exchange indicated in the letter from the overseas institution. If the
in excess of U.S.$ 30,000 (at actuals) may be released by authorised dealers to the extent
U.S. $ 30,000 per annum toward tuition fees, maintenance expenses, books etc. Exchange
Permissible amount
Exchange facilities are available for the actual duration of the course.