IMF Institute/RBI Course on Macroeconomic Adjustment and Financial Sector
Issues
October 11, 1999
Bank of India's College of Agricultural Banking, 
The Course is directed at senior-and middle-level official of the Government of India,
State Governments and the Reserve Bank of India who are involved with the design and
The objective of
the course is to  participants with macroeconomic management, 
sector reform, the development and monitoring of financial markets and the role of the
environment. The course is being conducted through lectures, group discussions and case
programme for India.
The course was inaugurated this morning at the College of Agricultural Banking by Dr.
A. 
A. Vasudevan set out the rationale for 
flavour imparted
to the course which distinguishes it from other forms of 
Shri S.K. 
make the course a success.
Mr. 
countries.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/505
Press 
developing greatly help them in gaining insights about the policy implementation in 
Institute team, gave details about the course content and noted that the interactions would
Vaez-Zadeh, Chief of the Asian Division, IMF Institute and head of the IMF Reza 
of the IMF Institute and the participants and assured them of all possible assistance to
Agricultural Banking extended a warm and hearty welcome to the members of the faculty
Newlay, Principal, College of elsewhere by the IMF Institute. Earlier, 
technical  support  provided
both, the design and the quality of participation and the country-specific 
organising the course, the emphasis placed on
Vasudevan, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, Speaking on the occasion, Dr.
studies in which participants will develop a macroeconomic policy 
liberalised regulatory and supervisory function for policy makers in the rapidly changing, 
between the different sectors of the economy, the rationale and modalities of financial
interlinkages familiarise
implementation of macroeconomic policies and financial sector reforms. 
RBI.
in India and represents a unique experiment in collaboration between the IMF and the
Pune. The course is the first of its kind
Issues in India. The course is being held between October 11-22, 1999, at the Reserve
have jointly sponsored a course on Macroeconomic Adjustment and Financial Sector
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) Institute and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)