Report of the In-house Working Group on Asset 
The Reserve Bank of India had set up an in-house Working Group to examine
securitisation as a process of financial engineering and its applicability to the Indian
financial system, especially in the mortgage and infrastructure sectors.  The Working
Group, with Shri V.S.N. , Chief General Manager In-Charge of Department of
Non-Banking Supervision as the Chairman and Shri K.K. Vohra , Deputy General
Manager as Member-Secretary, had, as members, senior officers drawn from Legal
Department, Department of Banking Operations and Development, Internal Debt
Management Cell and Industrial and Export Credit Department. The Working Group
had the benefit of presentations from and interaction with other regulators, market
intermediaries, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, experts in finance and
international agencies on various aspects encompassing securitisation. The Group
submitted its report to the Governor last week.
In its report, the Group has categorised the recommendations into short-term,
medium-term and long-term, with a definite timeframe for implementation in each
category.  It has suggested that securitisation should be appropriately defined to lend
uniformity of approach and restrict the benefits provided by law/regulation for
genuine securitisation transactions. The recommendations also include
rationalisation/reduction of stamp duties, inclusion of securitised instruments in
Securities Contract Regulation Act, removal of prohibition on investment in mortgage
backed securities by mutual fund schemes, tax neutrality of SPV, etc.   The
recommendations for tax reforms include the spread of upfront income received by
the originator over the tenure of the loan securitised and extension of benefits under
Section 88 of the Income Tax Act for repayment on housing loans, etc.
 The Working Group has suggested as medium-term measures increased flow
of information through credit bureau, standardisation of documents, improvement in
the quality of assets, upgradation of computer skills and exploring the possibilities of
securitising non-performing assets. The need  to  develop  some  insurance/guarantee
institutions  to  give  comfort to investors, especially in infrastructure and mortgage
sectors has been underscored by the Working Group as a long-term measure.
According to the Working Group, there is also a need for developing a host of
financial intermediaries with specialised skills and sophistication to provide the
building blocks for market growth.  The report has suggested that the Government of
India may consider bringing out an umbrella legislation covering all aspects of
The Group has also identified various impediments, viz., lack of investor base,
capital market infrastructure, regulatory framework, legal provisions, accounting and
taxation issues, besides good quality assets, upgradation of systems and
standardisation for securitisation to take off in the country. The Working Group has
also opined that the training institutes of the financial institutions should attempt to
spread awareness of the benefits and scope of securitisation increasingly among
While identifying the key characteristics of Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV),
the Group has recommended flexibility in the structure of SPV.  The report has
suggested prudential guidelines for banks, development financial institutions and non-
financial community.
securitisation.
Murty
December 29, 1999
Securitisationbank finance companies, including broad criteria for a true sale.  Adequate disclosure
norms have also been suggested to facilitate an informed decision by investors.  A
model offer document has also been suggested furnishing information on description
of assets, historical performance, transaction structure, end-use of funds, statement of
risk factors, rating rationale, etc.
The report will be shortly placed on the Reserve Bank website
( www.rbi.org.in).  Suggestions/comments, if any, may please be sent to Shri V.S.N.
Murty, Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Department of Non-Banking Supervision,
Reserve Bank of India, World Trade Centre I, `B’ Wing, 2 Floor, Cuffee Parade,
Colaba, Mumbia-400 005. (E-  Fax Nos.2150540, 2162768)
Release : 1999/2000/841
rbidnbs@vsnl.comnd
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
mail : 