cent  by year 2002. This is despite assuming an
compliance by the prescribed deadline. He pointed out that banks may be subject to penal
The Deputy Governor exhorted the private sector banks to strive towards achieving Y2K
putting in place systems for risks and asset liability management in these banks.
sector banks to help them make strategic decisions. He also stressed on the need for urgently
need for introduction of information and control systems, particularly in many of the old private
areas, financial systems have undergone fundamental changes. There was, thus, an immediate
revolution in information technology (IT) and electronic funds transfer and payment system
modernisation efforts. He pointed out that with globalising and because of the ongoing
The Deputy Governor lamented the fact that the old private sector banks were slow in
SBI.
or subordinated debt. Further, the needs of associated banks would easily be met by a cash rich
required by the strong banks and easily mobilisable from the capital market either through equity
past trends over this period. Again, a large proportion (Rs. 3,350 crore) of these capital funds are
return on assets at 0.8 per cent and 12 per cent increase by way of retained earnings based on
average annual growth at 15 per cent in their risk weighted assets, conservative estimate on
Assets Ratio (CRAR) requirement of 10 per 
of the State Bank of India as additional capital funds to meet the proposed Capital and Risk
externally only around Rs 5,400 crore, that too only 13 nationalised banks and 5 associate banks
Governor explained that the public sector banks despite their largeness would need to mobilise
funds by the public sector banks. Stating that these estimates were far off the mark, the Deputy
Rs. 13,500 crore being mentioned in some quarters that may be required as additional capital
While discussing the issue of capital adequacy, the Deputy Governor alluded to the estimates of
standards but attempt to even keep the future requirement while augmenting their capital base.
therefore, urged these banks to make efforts to not only reach the prescribed capital level
for dealing with various emerging risk weighted products in Indian banking system. He,
especially for the old private banks for their business growth and match the capital prescriptions
networth were crucial for these banks. He explained that additional capitalisation was essential
Deputy Governor stated that reaching the prescribed level of capital adequacy and enhancing the
Highlighting capital adequacy as the most important issue for the private sector banks, the
global experiments.
between a weak and strong bank but can also be between two strong banks as proven by recent
voluntary mergers among themselves. He clarified that the mergers need not necessarily be
,  for Elaborating this, the Deputy Governor stated that the private banks should go, if necessary
banks today. The conference was held at the National Institute for Bank Management, Pune.
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of  India at a conference of the Chairmen of private sector
bring in synergy and economies of scale to their operations. This was stated by Shri S.P.Talwar,
The old private sector banks, which are 26 in number, need to realign themselves in order to
February 15, 1999
the Need for Realignment in Old Private Sector Banks
RBI  Deputy Governor stresses onAlpana Killawala
Press Release No: 1998-99/1059
General Manager
clearly defined.
part of regular portfolio building and should happen as a part of strategy and policy which are
should also have their own internal lending and prudential norms. Lending, he said, should be a
regulatory authority, prescribed the desirable prudential norms, banks in their own interest
attention to structuring their credit portfolios. He explained that while the Reserve Bank has, as a
interactive session with the participants. Shri Verma advised the participants to pay special
Later, the Deputy Governor and Shri M.S. Verma, Honorary Advisor to the Reserve Bank had an
possible system failures.
Institutions have also been advised to put in place appropriate contingency plans to take care of
measures in case of persisting non-compliance beyond the prescribed deadline of March 1999.