April 20, 1999
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Dr.Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, today in a meeting with the
Chief Executives of banks announced the Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 1999-
2000. In his statement, Governor, after presenting a review of macro-economic
developments during 1998-99, spelt out the stance of the policy for the current year and
announced an array of measures. While no changes have been made in Bank Rate and
repo rate, CRR has been reduced by 0.5 percentage point. Other measures related to
development of money, government securities and debt markets, strengthening of
prudential norms, rationalisation of interest rates and introduction of a new liquidity
The Governor recalled that in April 1998, the growth rate of GDP was projected
to be in the region of 6.5 to 7.0 per cent which, in view of continued slow down in
industrial activities, was lowered to 6.0 per cent in October 1998. Governor said that the
actual outcome was likely to be somewhat lower than anticipated. According to the
preliminary estimates of the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), the GDP growth in
1998-99 is likely to be 5.8 per cent as compared with a growth rate of 5.0 per cent for
1997-98. The actual outcome in respect of inflation was, however, in line with the
The Governor mentioned that during 1998-99, the annual growth in M on a
3
point-to-point basis was 17.8 per cent as against 17.9 per cent in 1997-98. Expansion of
primary liquidity during 1998-99 was higher than in the preceding year, with reserve
money increasing by 14.5 per cent as against an increase of 13.2 per cent in the previous
year. Aggregate deposits of the scheduled commercial banks increased by 18.5 per cent
as against 19.7 per cent in the previous year, time deposits accounting for the entire
The Governor mentioned that the conventional non-food bank credit showed a
lower expansion of Rs.37,594 crore (12.1 per cent) as against an increase of Rs.40,789
crore (15.1 per cent) in the previous year. The total flow of funds from banks to the
commercial sector including banks’ investment in bonds/debentures/shares issued by
public sector undertakings and private corporate sector and commercial paper, etc.,
however, was Rs.54,304 crore as against an increase of Rs.53,377crore in the
corresponding period of the previous year, he added.
increase.
projected rate of 5 to 6 per cent in the April 1998 statement, he added.
Domestic Developments
adjustment facility.
New Measures for Micro credit, Venture Capital and Infrastructure Financing
Prudential Measures strengthened
Interest Rates Rationalised
Markets
More Measures for Development of Money, Repo, Government Securities and Debt
A New Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility introduced
Liquidity to be Easy – CRR reduced by 0.5 percentage point
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 1999-2000
RBI Governor announcesThe Governor mentioned that gross market borrowing of the government
exceeded the budgeted level by around Rs.15,000 crore and amounted to Rs.93,953 crore
The Governor observed that the continuing large fiscal deficits year after year in
1990s have led to sharp increase in repayment obligations and a reduction in average
maturity profile of outstanding public debt. In 1991-92, the ratio of gross to net
borrowing of the Central Government was 1 : 0.89 which in 1998-99 stood at 1 : 0.67,
implying a 22 paise decline in the net receipt for every rupee of borrowing in this period.
Mentioning about the increasing interest payments on public debt which touched
Rs.43,712 crore in 1998-99 (RE) rising from Rs.14,021 crore in 1991-92, the Governor
During 1998-99, despite large scale gross borrowings by the Government,
contrary to market expectations at the beginning of the year, the medium and long-term
interest rates had remained fairly stable. Mentioning about the Reserve Bank’s approach
in managing the large government borrowing without causing undue pressure on interest
rates, the Governor said that in June 1998, the Reserve Bank had announced its intention
to accept private placement of government securities from time to time (in the event of
markets’ bids being at substantially higher levels due to uncertainties in the market) and
He further added that it was also significant that the strategy of private placement
combined with active OMO did not lead to an undue expansion of Reserve Bank’s credit
While alluding to the effective working of this approach, the Governor stated that
sooner or later, the pressure on market interest rates would become unavoidable unless
fiscal deficit of the Government and its borrowing requirements were kept within
reasonable limits..
The Governor said that developments during the past year illustrate the dilemma
faced by monetary authorities in a situation of uncertain macro-economic outlook in
respect of inflation and growth, alongside high monetary growth. When the current rate
of inflation is low, a high rate of growth in money supply nevertheless warrants
tightening of liquidity (and increase in interest rates) in order to dampen the aggregate
demand and to avoid potential problems. However, if growth of output is also low,
tightening of money supply during a period of relatively low inflation may result in a
further loss of output. This in turn could result in lower revenue and the need for
Government to borrow further. He added that a similar dilemma arose when inflation rate
accelerates because of supply shocks which are expected to be temporary. This, he said,
was the situation last year when, until October, inflation was accelerating due to lower
availability of a few primary commodities. The Reserve Bank at that time chose not to
tighten monetary policy in the expectation that price rise would reverse itself later in the
year when agricultural supplies improve. In retrospect, this judgement turned out to be
correct. However, if it had not, and inflation had accelerated further, he said that the
monetary policy would have required much sharper tightening in the subsequent months
The Governor felt that there were no simple objective or ‘quantitative’ answers to
monetary policy dilemma of this type in the short-run. There is no option but to carefully
balance conflicting considerations, and for the monetary authority to be prepared to
reverse its earlier ‘stance’ of policy if actual outcome happens to be substantially
different from what was expected. He observed that as the past experience in India and
indeed in other countries, including industrial countries, shows flexibility in respect of
monetary policy may have to be exercised in both directions, i.e., tightening as well as
2
loosening as circumstances warrant.
of the year.
to Central Government and the reserve money.
release them to the market as conditions improved.
said that this process could not go on indefinitely.
during the year 1998-99. The net market borrowing was Rs.62,903 crore.The Governor said that the 18-month period since September 1997 presented
major challenges for management of the external sector. Faced with several unfavourable
developments, the Reserve Bank had to, from time to time, take recourse to monetary and
other measures in order to stabilise the situation in the foreign exchange market, he
The day to day movements in exchange rates he said were market-determined and
would continue to remain so. The primary objective of the Government and the Reserve
Bank in regard to the management of the exchange rate is to maintain orderly conditions
in the foreign exchange market, and to curb destabilising and self-fulfilling speculative
activities by some forex operators during certain periods in order to take advantage of
prevailing uncertainties in the domestic or international situation. To this end, he said that
as in the past, the Reserve Bank would continue to monitor closely developments in the
financial markets at home and abroad, and take such monetary and administrative actions
The Governor mentioned that an area of current concern in regard to balance of
payments was the negative growth of exports, partly attributable to sluggish growth in
world trade. An important priority for the current year, he said, was to take all possible
The Governor informed that a committee of bankers has been set up t o ensure that
procedural problems coming in the way of ‘exporters’, particularly small exporters, from
utilising these new facilities are removed forthwith. This committee, he said, will interact
closely with branch managers as well as exporters, particularly in locations where there is
Exporters currently enjoy a facility to retain a portion of their earnings to be
utilised for certain purposes under the scheme of Exchange Earners Foreign Currency
(EEFC) accounts. In response to suggestions received from exporters, Governor
announced the facility to issue cheques against EEFC balances with effect from May 1,
1999. Banks in India, holding such accounts, will be authorised to issue separate cheque
books for operation of these accounts. He further announced that the Reserve Bank would
grant approvals for loans/guarantees in respect of overseas offices of export
houses/trading houses/Star Trading Houses/Super Star Trading Houses provided the
The forward cover facility for FIIs has been further liberalised and expanded with
effect from June 11, 1998, FIIs were permitted to take forward cover from Authorised
Dealers to the extent of 15 per cent of their existing investment as on that date. Any
incremental investment over the level prevailing on June 11, 1998 was also made eligible
for forward cover. The Governor announced that as a simplification measure, the above
mentioned limits will henceforth apply to FIIs’ outstanding investments as on March 31,
1999. In other words, 15 per cent of outstanding investment on March 31, 1999 as well as
the entire amount – 100 per cent – of any additional investment made after this date will
be eligible for forward cover. He added that as a measure of further liberalisation, any FII
which has exhausted the limits, can apply to RBI for additional forward cover for a
further 15 per cent of their outstanding investments in India at the end of March 1999.
Applications for further additional limits can be made more than once after the earlier
3
II. Stance of Monetary Policy for 1999-2000
limits have been exhausted.
terms of such loans/guarantees were reasonable.
a concentration of small and medium scale exporters.
measures to provide maximum support to export efforts.
as may be considered necessary from time to time.
added.
External DevelopmentsThe Governor said that a major challenge for monetary policy in 1999-2000 is the
need to reconcile the conflicting objectives of restraining the overall growth of liquidity
in order to ensure price-stability, and at the same time facilitating the flow of adequate
bank credit for productive sectors of the economy in order to improve growth. If
industrial growth picks up, this may also help in restraining the Government’s demand
for additional credit from the banking sector, he added. Pointing out that the monetary
growth (M ) in 1998-99 as well as in 1997-98 was well above the projected levels, the
3
Governor stated that ideally it would be desirable to aim at a lower M growth in 1999-
3
2000 than the rate of growth of 15.0 to 15.5 per cent projected for the previous two years.
He, however, felt that keeping in view the Government’s borrowing requirements, an
unduly restrictive credit policy could militate against the need to enhance growth
prospects. As such, he said, a reasonable projection for M growth in 1999-2000 would
3
be in the range of 15.5 to 16.0 per cent. Consistent with a money supply growth of 15.5 to
16 per cent, the Governor placed the working estimate for the expansion in aggregate
deposits of scheduled commercial banks at Rs.1,18,500 crore (16.5 per cent). The
Governor mentioned that under normal circumstances and barring unanticipated
developments in the domestic and international situation, the Bank’s endeavour would be
in the direction of facilitating adequate availability of credit under a stable interest rate
The Monetary and Credit Policy statements of April and October last year had
focussed on ‘structural’ measures to strengthen the financial system and improve the
functioning of various segments of the financial market. In the current year also, the
Governor has proposed to carry forward the direction of financial reforms initiated in
recent years, keeping in view the actual experience in implementation, the current state of
The following monetary and credit policy measures were announced by the
CRR has been reduced by 0.5 percentage point from 10.5 per cent to 10 per cent
With an intention to moving to Liquidity Adjustment Facility, as suggested by
Narasimham Committee, pending further upgradation in technology and legal/procedural
changes to facilitate electronic transfer and settlement, the Reserve Bank has introduced
an Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF) through repos and collateralised
 The general refinance facility is being withdrawn with immediate effect. It will be
replaced by a collateralised lending facility (CLF) up to 0.25 per cent of the
fortnightly average outstanding aggregate deposits in 1997-98 which will be
available for two weeks at the Bank Rate. An additional collateralised lending
facility (ACLF) for an equivalent amount of CLF will also be available at the
Bank Rate plus 2 per cent. CLF and ACLF availed for periods beyond two weeks
will be subject to a penal rate of 2 per cent for an additional two week period.
There will be a cooling period of two weeks thereafter. The current restriction on
participation in money market (during the period that such facilities are availed
 
4
The existing facility for export refinance will continue. (ii)
of) will be withdrawn in order to facilitate systemic adjustment in liquidity.
(i)
lending. The features of this facility are given below:
A New Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility Introduced
effective fortnight beginning May 8, 1999.
Cash Reserve Ratio Reduced
Governor today:
banks and financial institutions, and other pertinent developments.
III. Financial Sector Reforms and Monetary Policy Measures
environment with policy preference for softening to the extent circumstances permit. Liquidity support against collateral of government securities, based on bidding
commitment and other parameters, will be available to Primary Dealers at Bank
Rate and the amounts will remain constant throughout the year. Each drawal will,
 Additional liquidity support against collateral of government securities will also
be provided to Primary Dealers for periods not exceeding two weeks at a time and
 
 The above facilities will be supplemented by open market operations in
To improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism and develop further the
money and debt markets in the light of the recommendations made by the Narasimham
Committee, it has been decided to develop the repos market with appropriate regulatory
safeguards. The prudential safeguards have been designed to ensure transparency and
accountability while at the same time increasing liquidity and depth in the securities
 LIC, IDBI and other non-bank participants in the money market will be
allowed to access short term liquidity through repos thereby facilitating their cash
Guidelines for interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements (FRAs) are being
issued to facilitate hedging of interest rate risks and ensuring orderly development of the
 With a view to increasing the depth and liquidity in the government securities market for
the development of the debt market and in which the PDs are expected to play a greater
role in the absorption of the primary issues and in market making, it has been decided (a)
to obtain minimum bidding commitment from each PD for the auctions of Treasury bills
so that together they absorb 100 per cent of the notified amount, and (b) to offer an
enhanced underwriting option to PDs for the entire notified amount in auctions of dated
It is proposed to announce a calendar for issue of Treasury Bills for the entire
year. As was announced in the Monetary and Credit policy for the first half of 1998-99, it
is also proposed to introduce 182 day Treasury Bill which will be issued every fortnight
It is proposed to have the option of issuing new loans on price basis instead of on
yield basis as done currently so as to consolidate outstanding loans for ensuring sufficient
volumes and liquidity in any one issue and to facilitate the emergence of benchmarks and
5
development of the STRIPS. (iii)
Interest rates Rationalised – Banks to have more operational flexibility.
as part of the calendar.
securities.
Government Securities Market
MMMFs have been permitted to offer ‘cheque writing’ facility to their investors.
derivatives market.
management and gradual move out of the call money market.
 UTI,
market.
Money Market
More measures for development of Money, government securities and debt markets
government dated securities and treasury bills by RBI.
(vi)
Absorption of liquidity in the market will continue to be through fixed rate repos. (v)
the interest rate will be at Bank Rate plus 2 per cent.
(iv)
however, be subject to the usual restriction of repayment within 90 days.Banks have been provided with the freedom to operate different PLR for different
maturities provided the transparency and uniformity of treatment originally envisaged
Similarly, banks have been permitted to offer fixed rate loans subject to
In cases of deposit rate being in excess of PLR, advances to depositors against
fixed deposits can be made by banks without reference to the ceiling of PLR. This will be
 Boards of Directors of banks have been permitted to delegate necessary
powers to Asset Liability Management Committee for fixing interest rates on deposits
and advances, so as to enable banks to respond promptly to changes in interest rate
In the Mid-term review of October 1998, certain important changes recommended
by the Narasimham Committee in respect of prudential norms, risk weights and exposure
norms were announced. As a continuation of this process, following further measures are
 With effect from the year ending March 31, 2000, banks will have to classify a
 Banks’ and financial institutions’ investment in Tier II bonds issued by other
banks will be subjected to a ceiling of 10 per cent of the bank’s and FI’s total
The waiting period of two years in respect of advances where terms of the loan
agreement regarding interest and principal have been renegotiated or rescheduled after
commencement of production is reduced to one year (or four quarters) if the interest and
As part of the process of moving away from micro-level regulations, the Reserve
Bank has decided that henceforth it will be left to the Board of Directors of each bank to
prescribe detailed rules for determining the date of ‘commencement of commercial
production’ of units instead of following the detailed prescription laid down by the
The Reserve Bank proposes to issue ALM guidelines to financial institutions.
A special cell, manned by a senior officer from the commercial banking sector
with practical experience in this area, is being set up in RBI in order to liaise with
NABARD and micro-credit institutions for augmenting the flow of credit to micro-credit
institutions and Self-Help Groups. The time frame for the cell to complete its work will
Interest rates applicable to loans given by banks to micro-credit organisations or
The overall ceiling of investment by banks in ordinary shares, convertible
debentures of corporates and in units of mutual funds, etc., which is currently at 5 per
6
Prudential Measures strengthened
by these organisations to their members/beneficiaries will be left to banks’ discretion.
be one year and its proposals will be given top priority.
Micro Credit and Venture Capital
Reserve Bank.
instalment of loans have been serviced regularly as per the terms of rescheduling.
capital.
(ii)
minimum of 75 per cent of their securities as current investments.
(i)
being notified shortly:
environment.
The
applicable both for domestic and non-resident deposits.
conformity to ALM guidelines.
continues to be maintained.cent of their incremental deposits will stand automatically enhanced to the extent of
Banks’ investments in venture capital. Investments in ‘venture capital’ would also qualify
Incremental credit given to NBFCs by banks for on-lending to small road and
water transport operators and to units in tiny sector of industry, over March 31, 1999 will
Credit for Infrastructure - Guidelines
The RBI has finalised operational guidelines, in consultation with select banks
and financial institutions for extending credit for infrastructure projects. Banks/FIs will
be free to sanction term loans for technically feasible, financially viable and bankable
projects undertaken by both public and private sector undertakings subject to prescribed
criteria. Banks are also being permitted to issue inter-institutional guarantee subject to
Settlement Advisory Committee – Scheme finalised
 scheme for Settlement Advisory Committee (SAC) has been finalised by RBI under
which public sector banks may set up SACs for compromise settlement of NPAs of small
sector, which will be in addition to the existing compromise settlement procedure for
th
In respect of new NBFCs, which are incorporated on or after 20 April 1999 and
which seek registration with RBI, the requirement of minimum net owned funds has been
raised to Rs. 2 crore. This stipulation will not apply to NBFCs which are already
State Co-operative Banks will be provided accommodation from the Reserve
Bank towards general banking business at the Bank Rate instead of the previous Bank
The Reserve Bank will appoint a High-Power Committee to review the
performance of the urban co-operative banks and suggest measures for strengthening this
The Reserve Bank will expand the VSAT based network in order to ensure that
both funds and non-funds business are placed on an on-line basis as soon as possible. A
National Payments Council with a Deputy Governor as the Chairman and representative
membership is being constituted. It is planned to have real time gross settlement (RTGS)
system in place in the next 15 to18 months.
7
Payment and Settlement System and Y2K ComplianceUrban Co-operative Banks
vital sector.
Rate plus 2.5 percentage points.
Accommodation from RBI to State Co-operative Banks at lower rates.
registered with RBI or whose applications are presently under consideration.
Regulation of Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
large and medium scale borrowers.
 A
certain norms.
qualify for priority sector status.
for inclusion in priority sector lending. financial sector has responded reasonably well to the Reserve Bank’s initiative in
September 1997 to take necessary action to be Y2K compliant. Regular meetings
between the banks and RBI in recent months have helped to give confidence that the
system would not carry the Y2K risk. The information about the Y2K compliance
position in the financial sector is being shared with the groups working on Y2K
A review of credit and monetary developments in the first half of the current year
will be undertaken in October 1999. This mid-term review will generally be confined to a
review of monetary developments and to such changes as may be necessary in monetary
Alpana Killawala
8
Press Release : 1998-99/1312
General Manager
policy and projections for the second half of the year.
Mid-term Review
compliance in the rest of the economy.
 The