Annual Conference of Authorised Dealers
November 19, 1999
Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India today inaugurated the annual
conference of the heads of foreign exchange departments and international divisions of banks in
Mumbai.  The annual conference of authorised dealers and heads of international divisions of
banks is a forum for exchange of views among authorised dealers (banks authorised to deal in
foreign exchange), the Reserve Bank officials and the Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of
India (FEDAI).  Apart form authorised dealers and FEDAI , the conference was also attended by
Shri S.P. Talwar, Deputy Governor, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Shri Khizar Ahmed,
Explaining briefly the role played by the Reserve Bank of India in management of
foreign exchange markets, Governor Dr. Jalan stated that irrespective of the system and the level
of development, all countries are equally concerned - explicitly or implicitly - about the sharp
movements in their currencies.  “Too much action in too short a time is a cause of concern for
all”, he stated. According to the Governor, therefore, developed as well as developing countries
closely monitor the developments in the foreign exchange markets.  As the experience the world
over has shown, no central bank can afford complacency, the Governor maintained. He further
stated that the main objective of the exchange rate management policy pursued by the Reserve
Bank was to ensure orderly conditions and avoid unusual volatility. He added that the Reserve
Bank kept a high level of reserves to be able to meet any unforeseen contingency. The Governor
expressed “reasonable satisfaction” at the manner in which the foreign exchange markets had
responded so far.
Focusing upon the procedural aspects relating to the exchange control regulations, the Governor
stated that India had attained full convertibility of the Rupee on the current account. This policy
change was supplemented by simplifying the procedures and documentation. The Reserve Bank
has sought to achieve this simplification in procedures by increasing delegation of powers to
authorised dealers. This undoubtedly placed greater responsibility on the authorised dealers. He
urged the authorised dealers to further help in simplification of procedures to the individual
customers and provide hassle- free and efficient service.  The Governor informed that the
Reserve Bank was also attempting to minimise the documentation. The bonafides of any
transaction, he said, should be verified only in cases of doubt and not routinely. He referred to
the Regulation Review Authority set up in the Reserve Bank of India to look into these issues
and welcomed the suggestions from authorised dealers towards further simplifying exchange
control regulations for the public and the corporate sector.
Earlier, while welcoming the participants to the conference, Executive Director, 
Khizer Ahmed gave an overview of the development in the exchange control area over last one
year.  He mentioned that the delegation of powers to authorised dealers on current account was
nearly completed and he urged the authorised dealers to pass on the benefits of this
simplification to the general public.  He also underscored the need for educating the bank
functionaries at the front desk on the simplified procedures for better customer service.  
Shankarnarayan on behalf of FEDAI and other member banks assured full cooperation in
Shri
Shri
Executive Director of the Reserve Bank.achieving the long-term objective of the Reserve bank in making foreign exchange transactions
Release : 1999/2000/679
Press 
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
for the general public hassle-free.