July 15, 1999
The Union Finance Minister, Shri Yashwant Sinha, visited the central office of
the Reserve Bank of India in Mumbai today, and addressed the senior officers of the
Bank.
In his address to the senior off icers of the Reserve Bank, the Finance Minister
said that the behaviour of the economy during the recent events in Kargil had amply
demonstrated India’s inherent fundamental strength. Despite the recent intrusion on our
border, the economy remained stable and vibrant .  It now has the lowest rate of inflation
of only 2 per cent, which is substantially lower than witnessed in recent memory .  Our
foreign exchange reserves are comfortable and substantially higher than last year, and the
industrial output and exports have also shown encouraging trends. The capital market
reached an all time high level yesterday .  Food stocks are also more than ample, and food
security is ensured. The Finance Minister stated that it has been possible to achieve such
results because of the resilience of our economy and the resurgence of investors’
In this context, Finance Minister referred to the close co-ordination between the
Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India, in the formulation of the macro-
economic policies, particularly monetary and external sector policies .  He lauded the
Reserve Bank efforts in ensuring orderly credit, monetary and foreign exchange
environment despite many difficult challenges, and stated that the Indian economy will
achieve a higher rate of growth of 7 per cent in the current year consistent with price
.  He pointed out that this would be an outstanding performance among
developing countries.
The Finance Minister reiterated his statement in the Parliament and underlined the
Government’s resolve to provide maximum autonomy to the Reserve Bank, as the
country’s Central Bank, in the conduct of monetary and financial policies .  He urged the
Reserve Bank staff to carry out their responsibilities devotedly in the interest of country’s
development. He emphasised the need for evolving appropriate supervisory and
regulatory framework in relation to banks and other financial institutions as per best
international norms. He was confident that, given due diligence and effort on the part of
can rank as one of the best in the world.
Dr.Bimal Jalan, Governor, thanked the Finance Minister for his visit to the
Bank  and for his address to the officers.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/75
Press 
Reserve 
all concerned, India’s financial system 
stability
confidence in our macro-economic stability.
Finance Minister Visits Reserve Bank