April 24, 1999
shares.  The Reserve bank has also asked financial institutions to invest such corpus in
I  capital, in India under
be treated as tier I capital in this example will be Rs.78.91.
Alpana Killawala
capital, the term lending institution will have to 
Press Release : 1998-99/1334
General Manager
the recipient of preference shares as a grant in perpetuity. In other words, the amount that could
Rs. 78.91 (Rs. 100 - Rs.21.09) will be the grant equivalent and  can be assumed to be available to
securities is 12.45 per cent, the discounted value of Rs. 100 works out to Rs. 21.09. The balance
Assuming that the value of preference shares is Rs. 100 and the yield on 20-year government
corpus created as above to be treated as tier I capital.
Reserve Bank has, therefore, allowed only the amount of preference shares less the amount of
Companies Act allows issuance of preference shares for a maximum period of only 20 years. The
the Companies  Act, 1956, issuance of perpetual preference shares is not allowed. The
permit inclusion of non-cumulative perpetual preference shares in Tier-
Although the capital adequacy standards prescribed by the Bank for International Settlements
raising of resources, etc.
disclose the amount and the purpose of the corpus separately in the balance sheet, prospectus for
corpus so created for its normal operations and must keep it separately. The FI should also
The Reserve Bank has also stated that the financial institution should not use the amount of the
the transfer of equivalent amount from the reserves.
provide for changes in the tax rates. Shortfall in the corpus, if any, will have to be met through
Further, it has asked the institutions to value the amount in the corpus every year in order to
shares so as to eliminate the re-investment risk.
Government of India securities having maturity coinciding with the maturity of such preference
investment of which on maturity becomes equal to or more than the amount of such preference
create  a corpus of such minimum amount, the
standards, the Reserve Bank has prescribed that to be able to treat the "grant equivalent" as tier I
In a circular issued to all-India term lending and refinance institutions on capital adequacy
implicit in any loans/shares transferred at below market value or interest rates.
"Grant element" is calculated to measure the amount of perpetual 'subsidy or unrequited transfer
certain conditions.
cumulative preference shares at par with perpetual non-cumulative preference shares subject to
term lending and refinance institutions may treat the "grant equivalent" implicit in non-
The Reserve Bank of India has decided that for the purpose of capital adequacy, the all India
Treatment of Preference Shares for Capital Adequacy Standards