March 1, 1999
MARCH 1, 1999.
The present scheme of  WMA to State Governments has been revised  on the  basis of
recommendations of the Vithal Committee. The revised scheme which is set out below was
made effective from March 1, 1999. The Vithal Committee Report  was also released by
Reserve Bank Of India today.
Under Section 17(5) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the RBI provides Ways and
Means Advances to the States banking with it to help them to tide over temporary mismatches in
the cash flow of their receipts and payments.  There are two types of WMA- normal and special.
While normal WMA are clean advances, special WMA are secured advances provided against
the pledge of Government of India dated securities. Presently, the limits are fixed from time to
time as multiples of minimum balance. The present limit effective from August 1, 1996, amount
to Rs.3,085.60 crore – Rs.2,234.40 crore (normal WMA) and Rs.851.20 crore (special WMA).
At the time of the previous revision in 1996, the ceilings for normal and speicial WMA were
fixed at 168 times and 64 times of the minimum balance of Rs.13.30 crore. From 1976 onwards,
the minimum balances were not changed but the WMA limits were increased by increasing the
multiple in successive revision.
Any amount drawn by a State in excess of WMA is an overdraft.  As per the Overdraft
Regulations Scheme, no State is allowed to run an  overdraft with the RBI for more than ten
consecutive working days. In case an overdraft appears and remains beyond ten consecutive
working days, the RBI   and its agencies stops payment on  behalf of the State.
An Informal Advisory Committee on Ways and Means Advances to State Governments
was constituted by  Reserve Bank Governor, under the Chairmanship of Shri B.P.R. Vithal,
Member Tenth Finance Commission, on August 19, 1998 to go into the existing scheme of
Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to State Governments to consider rationalisation and if
warranted, to suggest revision of limits, keeping in view the needs of the State Governments as
also the issues relating to fiscal and monetary management. The Committee submitted its Report
to Governor on November 25, 1998.
The major thrust of the Committee was to rationalise  the present system of WMA and
overdraft to State Governments.  In this context, the recommendations of the Committee relate
to (a) rationale for revision in normal WMA (b) liberalisation of special WMA (c) stricter
measures for regulating overdrafts  and (d) revision of minimum balance.
Normal WMA
The Committee is of the opinion that fixing WMA limits as multiples of unchanged
minimum balance, as in the past does not capture the differing needs of the States in line with
the different growth in their budgetary transactions.  This has resulted in wide inter-state
variations in the WMA limits in relation to the size of the budget and this needs to be corrected.
The Committee, therefore, has recommended  delinking the WMA limits from the unchanged
minimum balance and in its place recommended that   the base for revision of WMA limits
should be the sum of revenue receipts and capital expenditure.  Accordingly, the Committee has
recommended increase in the normal WMA for non-special category States from the present
RECOMMENDATIONS OF VITHAL COMMITTEE
PRESENT SYSTEM
GOVERNMENTS  FROM TO STATE 
REVISED SCHEME OF WAYS AND MEANS ADVANCES (WMA)2
limit of Rs.2 ,032.8 crore to Rs.3,352 crore, thus showing an increase of Rs.1,319 crore or 64.9
per cent.  Similarly, for the special category States the limits would increase to Rs.333 crore
from Rs.201.6 crore reflecting an increase of Rs.131.4 crore of 65 per cent. In aggregate the
normal WMA limits for all States could increase to Rs.3 ,685 crore from Rs.2,234 crore showing
an increase of Rs.1,451 crore or 65 per cent.  While making the above recommendations, the
Committee has considered desirable that the increase should not be less than 40 per cent for
individual non-special category States and 50 per cent for special category States.
Liberalisation of Special WMA
The Committee is of the view that while a formula based approach may be adopted in the
case of normal WMA, special WMA may be liberalised and States allowed to draw Special
WMA  against  their holdings of dated Government  securities.
Overdraft Regulation Scheme
With regard to Overdraft Regulation Scheme the Committee observes that the scheme is
working well at present as a disciplinary mechanism and the Committee does not  recommend
any relaxation in this scheme.  The Committee has, however, found that some States which are
persistently in overdrafts are defeating the purpose of the scheme by so adjusting their finances
that they clear the overdrafts within the time limit and again emerge into overdrafts.  There are
States that have remained in overdrafts for as many as 200 days in a year and there are States
which overdrew beyond several times the WMA limits.  Recognising this, in addition to the
present limit of 10 consecutive working days, the Committee recommended a ceiling on
overdrafts (100 per cent  of normal WMA limits) and also a restriction on the number of days
(20 working days during a quarter in the financial year).
Revision of minimum balance
Having delinked the WMA from minimum balance and recommended linking it to the
volume of transactions, the Committee felt that the minimum balance should be revised and
linked to the same base as normal WMA.  On this basis, the minimum balance of Rs.37.97 crore
has been recommended  for non-special category States (as against Rs.12.10 crore at present)
and Rs.3.08 crore for special category States (as against 1.20 crore at present).
The above recommendations of the Report were discussed at the  Conference of the
Finance Secretaries of State Governments organised by the Reserve Bank of India on January
16, 1999 where, Government of India and Planning Commission were also represented. In the
light of the discussions the revised Scheme of Ways and Means Advances has been finalised.
The features of the revised scheme are :
i) The base for the revised WMA limits will be three year average of revenue receipts plus
capital expenditure. Accordingly, the normal WMA limits have been increased by 65 per cent  to
Rs. 3,685 00 crore  ( from Rs. 2,234.40 crore ).
(ii) limits for Special WMA will be liberalised.  Accordingly, under the revised scheme, there
will be  no upper limit on special WMA as a multiple of minimum balance.  The States will be
provided special WMA against their actual holdings of dated Government of India securities.
(iii) No State shall be allowed run an overdraft with RBI for more than ten consecutive working
days.  If overdraft remains beyond ten consecutive working days, RBI will stop payment on
behalf of the State.  The overdraft shall not exceed 100 per cent of  normal WMA limits.  If
overdraft exceeds 100 per cent of WMA limit  in a finance year, on the first occasion RBI will
(
REVISED SCHEME OF WAYS AND MEANS ADVANCES3
advised the State Governments; on a second or any subsequent occasion, the State shall be given
only three working days’ notice to bring down the overdraft within the 100 per cent limit.  If this
is not adhered to, payments will be stopped.
(iv) The revised scheme of WMA has been implemented with effect from March 1, 1999.
(v) The minimum balance will be revised upward linking it to the same base as for WMA from
the same date the RBI will receive the concurrence from the State Governments.
(vi) The recommendation that no State shall be allowed to run an overdraft for more than twenty
working days during a quarter in the financial year will be implemented after two years.
(vii) The review for future revision will be made by the Reserve Bank of India after three years
and the same criteria as now, will be used with latest three years actuals.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/1113