 
 
01 Nov 1999 
 
 
Year 2000 Readiness of Financial Sector 
 
The High Level Working Group on Year 2000 appointed by the Reserve Bank of India under the 
guidance of the Deputy Governor met today to review the progress of Y2K readiness of banks 
and financial institutions. The members discussed, among others, various aspects of contingency 
plan, dry run of contingency plan in simulated environment, greater information sharing and 
various aspects of Event Management Mechanism so as to ensure smooth rollover to Year 2000. 
The operationalisation of the Y2K compliant state-of-the-art IBM 390 mainframe of MICR cheque 
processing at all the National Clearing Cells (NCC) of the Reserve Bank of India (Mumbai, New 
Delhi, Chennai and Calcutta) by the end of October 1999 was regarded by the Group as an event 
of great importance in the context of the Year 2000 readiness. The Group welcomed the various 
decisions announced in regard to the Y2K preparations in the Mid-term Review of Monetary and 
Credit Policy on October 29, 1999.  
The Group also took the following decisions after considerable deliberations :  
• The banks would continue to test their contingency plans in simulated environment. As a 
part of contingency planning the branches of banks would maintain hard copies of 
accounts.  
• The process of audit of Y2K readiness by the third party should continue.  
• The banks should ensure availability of adequate cash stocks at the branches. The 
Reserve Bank would ensure that its Issue Offices and currency chests with commercial 
banks have adequate cash to meet the requirement of the banks in their area.  
• The banks should continue to share information with periodical disclosures, on Y2K 
readiness to give greater level of comfort to the public in general and their customers in 
particular. In this connection, regular updates on a weekly basis on disclosure statements 
and independent assessments will be provided on the RBI website at 
http://www.y2k.rbi.org.in  
• Event management mechanism for monitoring the smooth rollover to the Year 2000 
should include :  
o Identification of core group and core staff at branch, controlling office, head office 
levels to attend to critical application areas:  
o Each office to assign tasks to core groups/staff  
o Provision of telephones, standalone PCs, etc., to core staff for proper and timely 
reporting.  
o Banks need to confirm the setting up of Event Management Centres to the 
Reserve Bank of India, (the relevant Regional Office and the Central Office of 
Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai).  
o Proper interface with local utility organisations, state administration and 
supporting vendors.  
o Maintenance of data/information on failures during rollover for analysis and 
inspection/investigation.  
o No leave/transfer policy during the transition and stabilisation periods.  
o Reports of status of transition to Year 2000 to be sent to banks’ higher tier 
offices, the relevant regional office of RBI as also to the Central Office of RBI 
(Department of Banking Supervision).  • The Reserve Bank both at its Central Office and Regional Offices would coordinate with 
banks and financial institutions on the one hand and the apex level Y2K Task Force on 
the other hand prior to, during and after the rollover date.  
 
Alpana Killawala 
General Manager 
  
Press Release : 1999-2000/600 
 