August 17, 1999
Financial Markets on August 16, 1999
Report :
.(ET)
(Rs. in 
.. 846.45
.. 2.00
.. 28.50
..
.. 70.25
35.00
20.00
Govt sets up FIIA – The government on Monday set up a Foreign Investment
Implementation Authority to expedite foreign direct investment approvals and their
Banking
FIs, banks’ meet over rising NPA – The Reserve Bank of India has called
a meeting of financial institutions and leading banks to work out a common approach for
recovery of large non-performing assets and exchange of information on large accounts.  The
meeting is called on August 26 and will be chaired by RBI deputy governor 
.(BS)
BBL eyes larger Vysya pie – Bank Brussels Lambert (BBL) has sought the
government’s permission for a 10 per cent increase in its equity in the Karnataka based
Vysya Bank.Bank.Brussels currently holds 19.73 per cent stake in Vysya, a leading
scheduled private sector bank.  According to the BBL proposal, the Belgiumbased bank
wants to increase its equity from 19.73 per cent to 29.73 per cent.  The Belgium-based bank’s
stake in Vysya is currently owned by ING Bank by virtue of the British banking major’s
recent worldwide takeover of BBL.  The Foreign Investment Promotion Board has deferred a
.(BS)
RoC attempt to check fake software cos – The Registrar of Companies ( RoC) has
tightened the norms which permit companies to change names to reflect software business.
*****
Capital Market
decision on the issue
S.P.Talwar
Shri
RBI calls 
implementation.  The FIIA, under the industry ministry, will be a one-stop service shop.
Economy
182 days Treasury Bills
Treasury Bills
GoI dated securities
(Other than with RBI)
Repo transactions
364 days Treasury Bills
NIL 182 days Treasury Bills
91 days Treasury Bills
14 days Treasury Bills
Treasury Bills
NIL State Government Securities
GoI dated securities
Total outright transactions in
crore)
SGL
Call rates move up, closes in 9.75-10% range
Call Money Markets
Market 
News Summary
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISIONAn official press release said that the RoC would allow the change, only if a substantial
portion of the companies’ income, as reflected in their audited accounts or accounts certified
.(BS)
DPs asked to ensure online connectivity with branches – In an effort to reach out
to a larger number of investors, depository participants ( DPs) have been asked to ensure
online connectivity between the main office or depository and branch offices that have more
than 5,000 accounts agreed to the suggestion.  Sebi is also considering whether it could make
it mandatory for registrars to .(ET)
India ascends to sixth place on FID attraction: A T Kearney -  India’s rank has
improved by one notch at sixth for attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) in the first half
of 1999, though actual in flows into the country were affected by procedural delays, global
management constancy firm A T Kearney has said.  India’s ranking went up from seventh in
the latter half of 1998.  A T Kearney said in its latest FDI confidence index where United
.(OBP)
Interest rate structure – The clamour for raising interest rates must not be heeded as
such adjustment can only be in a rationally-evolved structure.  The interest rate regime since
1991 has been characterised by a `mindless kind of deregulation; which has given rise to a
N.A. .(HBL)
Evolution of management thought -  With organisations becoming large,
technologies of production complex and the environment complicated, management thought
is also metamorphosing, as it has over time.  With the global economy in a state of dynamic
flux because of the information technology, this will only get accentuated, says
.(HBL)
( N.S.D.Lobo)
August 17, 1999
****
Asstt.Manager
Dr.C.Rangarajan and examines the world situation on millennium-eve
Mujumdar number of distortions that need correction first, says 
Articles
States was named the most attractive destination in terms of FDI
Miscellaneous
dematerialise shares sent for transfer
by a chartered accountant, was derived from software business