programme known as "Swarnjayanti
Kalyan Yojana (GKY), Million
Wells Scheme (MWS).
Centre and the States in the ratio of 
Other financial institutions, 
NGOs), Technical institutions in the
Self Help
Swarozgaris.
website (URL:
Alpana Killawala
Raj Institutions, District Rural Developmentself employment such as organisation of theGanga Yojana
Release : 1999-2000/445 Press 
General Manager
. ) www.rbi.org.in
details of the SGSY scheme is also available on the RBI The 
educated unemployed, rural artisans and disabled are covered under the scheme.
labour, enterprises in the rural areas. The rural poor such as those with land, landless 
Government subsidy. The Scheme also aims at establishing a large number of micro
income generating assets through a mix of bank credit and three years by providing them 
The objective of SGSY is to bring every assisted family above the poverty line within
SHGs) as well as in the monitoring of the progress of the Groups (
NGO's help may be sought in the formation and nurturing of the scheme. 
district, will be involve in the process of planning, implementation and monitoring of the
DRDAs), Non Government Organisation ( Agencies (
Panchayat 
implemented by Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Co-operative banks.
75 : 25 and will be The scheme will be funded by the 
poor into Self Help Groups, training, credit, technology, infrastructure and marketing.
a holistic Scheme covering all aspects of 
The SGSY Scheme is operative from April 1, 1999 in rural areas of the country. SGSY is
Improved Toolkits to Rural Artisans (SITRA), 
(TRYSEM), Development of Women & Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA), Supply of
Programme (IRDP), Training of Rural Youth for Self Employment Development 
Yojana" (SGSY) is restructured from the existing schemes namely, Integrated Rural
of India among all Indian scheduled commercial banks. "Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar
Gram Swarozgar Yojana", launched by the Ministry of Rural Development, Government
The Reserve Bank of India has circulated a new 
September 29, 1999
Swarozgar Swarnjayanti Gram 