April 13,1999
conditions :
 
stipulated period of six months.
ii) 
iii) 
 
 
Auditor's Certificate.
and a Prudential Norms Return duly filled in complete in all respects including the
eligibility norms enumerated above, accompanied by a Board Resolution to that effect
an undertaking duly certified by the company's auditors that the company is fulfilling the
the company submits to the concerned R.O. of RBI having jurisdiction over the company v)
eligibility by actual inspection by the Bank as per the provision of RBI Act.)
and doubtful debts. The company will be reclassified after carefully examining their
into account the effect of income recognition norms and provisioning norms against bad
meaning as assigned to it in the RBI Act, 1934. (The NOF would be assessed after taking
or more as on the date of last audited balance sheet. The NOF shall have the same
the total of Net Owned Fund (NOF) and preferential share capital should be Rs. 10 lakhs iv)
Affairs issued from time to time.
the company must be strictly complying with Directions of Department of Company
Bank under provisions of the RBI Act.
the company must be strictly complying with the Directions issued to MBFCs by the
applied for issue of Certificate of Registration to Reserve Bank of India within the
the company must have been incorporated on or before January 9, 1997 and it must have i)
following 
companies) and the will be treated at par with the notified nidhi companies subject to the
companies will now be classified as Mutual Benefit Companies (MBCs i.e. un-notified nidhi
applicable to notified nidhi companies. Reserve Bank of India today announced that such
Government desired RBI to prescribe regulatory norms for such companies similar to those
special dispensation available to the notified nidhi companies.
DCA. The functioning of such companies was adversely affected since they could not get the
January 9, 1997 functioning on the lines of Nidhi companies which were not yet notified by
confined to their Members. However, there are a number of companies incorporated on or before
by the Department of Company Affairs (DCA) of Government of India an that their dealings are
been granted having regard to the fact that the companies notified as Nidhis are being regulated
core provisions of the RBI Act and the Directions issued thereunder. These exemptions have
classified as Mutual Benefit Financial Companies by the RBI and are exempted from several
Nidhi companies which are already notified under section 620A of the Companies Act, 1956, are
By Department of Company Affairs
Companies which are yet to be notified as nidhis
RBI prescribes Regulations for Mutual BenefitThe companies incorporated after January 9, 1997 will be considered for classification as
Mutual Benefit Companies only if they have minimum Net Owned Fund of Rs.25 lakhs and
preference share capital of Rs. 25 lakhs by the said date. The Notification gives existing Nidhi
have obtained a certificate of registration from RBI under the provisions of RBI Act.The regulatory norms and special dispensation as applicable to MBFCs will also be extended to
which the eligible mutual benefit companies can accept deposits as per the dispensation available
As desired by the Government, Reserve Bank has proposed to modify its directions in terms of
NOF shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the RBI Act, 1934.
classified as Mutual Benefit Companies till they are notified. Government has also clarified that
Rs.25 lakhs by December 31, 2002. All such eligible companies in the meantime shall be
have minimum NOF of Rs. 10 lakhs or more and that these shall be required to have NOF of
Notification as Nidhi Company under Section 620A of the Companies Act., 1956 only if they
incorporated on or before January 9, 1997 shall be considered by the Government for
Companies time upto December 31, 2002 for raising their NOF. The applications of companies
companies which will be declared as nidhi hereafter shall also have to attain the total of NOF and
nidhi so far have been required to attain the figure of Rs. 25 lakhs by 31.12.2002 and that the
All the nidhi companies which have been declared as and preference share capital of Rs.10 lakhs. 
as nidhi company, companies incorporated on or before 09.01.97 should have minimum NOF
The Government of India has prescribed that for considering  the applications for classification
nidhi companies and created a separate class of these companies till they are notified as nidhis.
Government has decided to give a special dispensation to the companies working on the lines of
received representations from a large number of such MBCs as also their associations.
special dispensation available to Notified Nidhi companies. The Bank as well as the Government
companies as loan companies adversely affected such companies since they could not get the
the lines of Nidhi companies but not yet notified by DCA. RBI Directions to classify such
There are a number of companies incorporated on or before January 9, 1997 and functioning on
both for the purpose of accepting deposits and making loans.
submission of certain Returns. However, they are allowed to deal with their shareholders only
prohibition from paying brokerage on deposits, ban on advertisements and the requirements of
from almost all the provisions of RBI Directions except those relating to interest rate on deposits,
registration, maintenance of liquid assets and creation of reserve fund. They are also exempted
Companies have been exempted from substantial provisions of the RBI Act viz. requirement of
activities and by DCA for its operational matters as also the deployment of funds. These
"Mutual Benefit Financial Company" by RBI and regulated by the Bank for its deposit taking
A Nidhi company notified under section 620A of the Companies Act is classified at present as
BACKGROUND
stop accepting further deposits failing which they will invite penal action under the RBI Act.
The MBCs whose functioning does not conform to the above requirements have been advised to
December 31, 2002 to reach the amount of Rs.25 lakhs as notified by DCA.
the companies satisfying the above criteria. Further the companies will be given time up toAlpana Killawala
Press Release : 1998-99/1292
General Manager
amending notification is being separately issued.
to the notified nidhi companies subject to the fulfilment of the specified conditions. The