RBI releases Report on Trend and
Progress of Banking in India – 1998-99
November 15, 1999
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in
India 1998-99.  The Report gives a comprehensive account of the performance of
commercial and cooperative banks, as also of other financial entities during 1998-99,
besides the policy and regulatory environment in which they operate.  The highlight of the
Report is a detailed treatment of main aspects of the functioning of the non-banking
NBFCs).
The first chapter captures in nutshell the banking developments and the policy
perspectives. It deals with both micro and macro issues that have a bearing on the
efficiency and working of the banking system.  The chapter emphasises the need for
furtherance of reform measures with a view to improving the allocative efficiency of
Chapter II on Developments in Commercial Banking analyses the financial performance of
scheduled commercial banks ( SCBs), and of the various bank groups viz., public sector
banks, nationalised banks, old private sector banks, etc., besides, a special focus has also
been provided on the financial performance of Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs).  The chapter
Chapter III covers the `Developments in Cooperative Banking’. The chapter also traces
developments in the role of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) as an apex institution in the provision of refinance facility ,  the aggregate
limits sanctioned by NABARD to the state cooperative banks increased, facilitating larger
In chapter IV, major developments in various financial institutions like IDBI, ICICI, IFCI
during 1998-99 are analysed together with the  performance of mutual funds.  The
aggregate financial assets of financial institutions and banks registered a lower growth of
12.2 per cent during 1998-99 as compared with 16.9 per cent in the preceding year. At the
disaggregated level, financial assets of financial institutions  registered a growth of 8.1 per
cent during 1998-99 as against 18.8 per cent during 1997-98.  The growth in the financial
assets of financial institutions was driven primarily by the significant growth in assets of
all-India term-lending institutions (16.0 per cent in 1998-99 on top of a rise of 22.5 per
cent in 1997-98).
Total resources mobilised by the mutual funds industry posted a decline during 1998-99.
Mutual funds other than UTI, in the private and public sector, however, posted better
The chapter on Non-Banking Finance Companies mainly discusses the regulatory,
supervisory and developmental aspects of NBFC functioning and provides useful insights
performance as compared with the previous year.
drawals by these banks.
provides a number of insights into the performance of these banks during the year.
resources and strengthening the banking system.
finance companies (into the growth of NBFCs and their role in the development and stability of the financial
sector.
website ( :www.rbi.org.in )
:1999-2000/648
The report is also available on the RBI 2
Press Release
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
URL