January 4, 1999
The September 1998 issue of the Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers (
research articles, two notes, one review article and two book reviews. 
efforts of the authors and their personal views.
India : An Empirical Evaluation"
by Michael Debabrata Patra and Sitikantha Pattanaik attempts to develop objective indicators of
developed an index of Exchange Market Pressure (EMP) and its operational variant, the
Monetary Conditions Index (MCI), as a guide for exchange market intervention. Based on the
the exchange rate regime in India can be characterised as highly managed, this needs to be
viewed against the transitional phase in the evolution of the regime and the development of the
variety of issues related to Deposit Insurance System including flat fee and risk based insurance
system for banks as also the question whether the system of risk-based deposit insurance should
hazard problems. The study finds that the case for private insurance is weak in view of the
repo-auctions and examines whether such reaction is consistent with applied auction rules. The
instrument for conducting monetary policy by central banks. Analysing the response of the
oriented regimes with no deposit insurance (as in New Zealand) or to a flat fee based insurance
money market to repo auctions, the study demonstrates that under discriminatory price repo
treasury securities repurchase agreement (repos) has evolved over a period as an important
Response in India" by Bhupal Singh and Sarat C. Dhal, illustrates the money market reaction to
The third article in this volume "Repo auction Formats, Bidders' Behaviour and Money Market
effective regulatory and supervisory system for them.
introduction of a risk based deposit insurance scheme for NBFCS only after putting in place an
limited ability of the private insurers to provide guarantee. The study makes the case for
fee based deposit insurance system in India could amplify the regulatory divergence and moral
be extended to non-banking institutions. The study has pointed out that the introduction of a flat-
guarantee scheme etc. The study brings out issues involving the need to move towards market
system for banks/non-banks, ownership of deposit insurance agency, continuation of credit
experiences of other countries - both developed and developing. The paper examines a wide
India" by D. Ajit, examines the deposit and credit insurance system in India in the light of
The second paper of the volume titled "A Case for Risk Based Deposit Insurance System in
markets.
market shows that RBI's response to speculative attacks has followed a common pattern. While
about the future course of monetary policy. A comparison of the two episodes of exchange
been driven by speculative activity. In this sense interventions have provided leading indications
variable they have been reinforced by monetary policy measures when the exchange market has
empirical evidence, the paper shows that while interventions have been the principal operating
exchange rate behaviour of the rupee, after it was left to the market in 1993. The study has
exchange market pressure and intervention activity in India. The study is focussed on the recent
The first paper of the volume "Exchange Rate Management in 
They reflect the research
OPs) contains three
September 1998 Issue
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers -there is a high degree of asymmetry in the response of money market to high and low repo rates.
market rates. The results suggest that fixed rate repos provided a floor rate for money market and
examines the tax status and presents the estimates of effective cost of small savings and finds
study suggests that the attractiveness of small savings instruments to households, pensioners and
institutional investors could be enhanced if such instruments could be made to provide a
against future inflation.
The note titled "Financing of Power Projects in 
investment. The note discusses a number of issues relating to the financing of the power sector.
ownership and private operation, private ownership and operation and community and user
The volume also contains a review article titled "Money and Finance through the Looking Glass"
by Y.V. Reddy, the review being of the book "Indian Economy : Essays on Money and Finance"
by Dr.C. Rangarajan. The article discusses the various facets of Dr.Rangarajan's contribution in
money demand function is stable and provides a predictable relationship among money, output
needs to be done in the policy front to address the basic issues of power sector financing,
financial sector efficiency. The review also discusses the issue of external sector management,
coupled with 'consistent and mutually reinforcing character of the measures taken' in boosting
highlighted the crucial significance of 'cautious sequencing of reforms' in the financial sector
and prices, it will serve as a sound foundation stone for monetary targeting. The review has
proposition that "money matters" which recurs in the book and observes that so long as the
linkages among the various strands of thoughts of Dr.Rangarajan. The review article explores the
debate on the role of state and markets in the Indian context. The review highlights the inter-
the field of monetary management, financial sector reforms, external sector management and the
external financing, sustainable debt-equity ratio etc.
including, pricing of electricity, transmission, and distribution (T&D) network, promotion, of
provision and examines their possible application in Indian states. The note observes that a lot
The study identifies four main approaches, viz, public ownership and operation, public
discusses the various policy initiatives by the Government to open up the power sector to private
India : Problems and Prospects" by R.K. Jain
guaranteed real return to investors, by indexing the instruments so as to provide them a hedge
to the expectations about the future changes in interest rates and thereby the inflation rate. The
related interest rates is offered on small savings, return on small savings would become sensitive
difference in costs compared to unrebated borrowing instruments. The study notes that if market
interest income. The note observes that tax rebates on small savings schemes crate a large
that the effective cost of borrowing instruments of the Government is very sensitive to tax rate on
reducing the implicit costs without adversely affecting their position in the budget. The note
examines the nature and extent of the hidden cost of small savings and explores the possibility of
The study titled "The Effective Cost of Small Savings" by M.S. Mohanty and Nishita Raje
proved effective in stabilising the money market rates around this level.
This could indicate the effectiveness of repo system as a signaling mechanism for the money
the other hand, reveals a robust relationship between repo and money market rates. In this case,
in the developed money markets. The empirical experiment with the fixed rate repo system, on
of high degree of asymmetry in the way money market responds to the repo rates, as evidenced
adjustment would be higher in the case of low rates than the high rates. There is, therefore, a lack
auctions, call money rates respond significantly to both low and high repo rates, but the degree ofagainst the backdrop of Dr. Rangarajan's views and perceptions.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 1998-99/886
sterilisation arising from capital flows resulting in net accretion in foreign exchange reserves
including the maintenance of sustainable level of current account deficit and the  issue of