April 5, 1999
Background
is being taken.
information/data gathered through this return are being presently analysed and necessary action
Bank had called for such return as on December 31, 1998 in the month of February. The
nature of their operations must submit this statutory return. It may be recalled that the Reserve
Keeping this in view, the Reserve Bank has decided that all NBFCs irrespective of the size or the
to protect the interest of their depositors.
considered to be necessary in order to direct the supervisory attention to such companies and also
any point of time, the number and names of NBFCs which accept/hold public deposits is
Reserve Bank shifting its regulatory focus to the NBFCs holding public deposits, ascertaining at
below Rs.25 lakh and still holding public deposits, the matter has been reviewed. With the
the large scale non-compliance of this requirement by NBFCs, particularly those having NOF
NBFCs not holding public deposits need not submit such return to the Reserve Bank, in view of
Bank in compliance of the statutory requirement. Although it was earlier clarified that the
1999. The companies are also required to furnish quarterly return on liquid assets to the Reserve
prescribed that the liquid assets requirement will be 15 per cent of such deposits from April 1,
deposits held on the last working day of the second preceding quarter. The Reserve Bank has
financial companies are required to maintain liquid assets as a specific percentage of public
In terms of the statutory provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, non-banking
rejection of the application for such a registration, if still pending with the Reserve Bank.
Bank of India Act including cancellation of Certificate of Registration, if already issued or
persistent non-compliance with this requirement will attract penal provisions under the Reserve
provided for in the format of the return. The  NBFCs have been cautioned that any default or
information about net owned funds (NoF) as per the last audited balance sheet in the space
only submit 'nil' information in respect of public deposits but they must also fill up the
The NBFCs have been further advised that the companies not holding public deposits should not
over the company and not to the Central Office.
the Department of Non-Banking Financial Companies of the Reserve Bank having jurisdiction
forms. The NBFCs have been advised to submit the return to the respective Regional Offices of
Registration have been rejected, are required to furnish this quarterly return as per prescribed
irrespective of the size of their NOF and including those whose applications for Certificate of
Bank the statutory quarterly return on liquid assets. It has been clarified that all NBFCs
fund or whether public deposits are held by them or not, are required to submit to the Reserve
including residuary non-banking companies (NBFCs) irrespective of the size of their net owned
The Reserve Bank of India has advised that all non-banking financial companies (NBFCs)
NBFCs Liquid Assets Compulsory for all 
Submission of Statutory Return onAlpana Killawala
Press Release : 1998-99/1246
General Manager