August 6, 1999
the work is originally performed in Hindi instead of depending on translation". Dr. 
of public sector banks and financial institutions present in the prize distribution function of
the Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield and House Journal competition held today. He further
stated that if the nation is to 
other Indian languages. He also appealed that Hindi should be used in right spirit in various
The function was being held under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, 
worked extensively in the field of Hindi and have also excelled in producing house journals
in Hindi. S.P. 
RBI were present in the function. 
the public sector banks and financial institutions. Prizes were also awarded to the winners of
in  1998-99 by the
Banking in the next decade".
Shri Jagdish is  a wide
Hence there is a need for doing the
banking functions in the public language so as to get full co-operation from every section of
the society. This would ultimately enhance the banking business.
institutions, Shri 
being the golden jubilee year of official language Hindi, this function has lot of significance.
Shri Jain, Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Reserve Bank of India proposed a vote of
Governor and the representatives of public sector banks and
financial institutions. Dr. Dwivei, General Manger (Officer-in-Charge) of
Rajbhasha Department of Reserve Bank of India had conducted the 
enclosed.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Release : 1999-2000/183
Jagdisha need to understand the nature of the Official Language and it would be possible only when
Press 
A list of winner banks and financial institutions and of the winners of the essay competition is
programme.
Shrinivas 
thanks to the Governor, Deputy 
M.L. 
and financial institutions.
organising such competitions would help in developing healthy competition among the banks
He also said that Hindi as an official language is now growing and under these circumstances,
B.S. Sharma, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India said that the year
Welcoming the Governor, Deputy Governor and representatives of banks/financial
today's banking relates to all the sections of the society. 
awareness in the banking sector towards the official language Hindi. He further stated that
Capoor in his speech said that in contrast to the early days there 
Reserve Bank. The essay competition was conducted on the subject "Nature of Indian
inter-bank Hindi essay competition that was conducted for the first time 
the meeting was also attended by the senior executives of
executives and the senior officers of Talwar, Deputy Governor, the senior Shri 
Capoor for awarding the Rajbhasha Shield to the banks/financial institutions who have
Shri 
fields in this golden jubilee year of official language Hindi.
realise the real prosperity, we have to take recourse of Hindi and
Jalan, Governor of Reserve Bank of India has stated this while addressing the representatives
Bimal
In order to make the common man aware of the economic development of the nation, there is
Prize Distribution
Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield 1997-98Results of Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield Competition 1997-98
Region "A" Position
Allahabad Bank Second
Punjab National Bank Third
Bank of Fourth
Bank of India Fourth
Central Bank of India Fourth
Region "B" Position
Bank of India
Second
Allahabad Bank Third
Punjab National Bank Fourth
Bank of Fourth
Union Bank of India Fourth
Region " C " Position
Bank of India
Second
Allahabad Bank Third
Bank of Fourth
Andhra Bank Fourth
Dena Bank Fourth
Results of Reserve Bank House Journal Competition 1997-98
Bank/Organisation Name Position
Punjab National Bank Second
Industrial Development Bank of India Third
Bank of Maharashtra Fourth
Corporation Bank Fourth
Dena Bank Fourth
Inter Bank Hindi Essay Competition 1998-99 - Results
Region "A"
Shri 
Canara Bank
Mujaffarnagar
Export Import Bank of India
First Gupta Sarvagnyshekhar 
First
Baroda
Oriental Bank of Commerce
First
Baroda
Oriental Bank of Commerce
First
Baroda
First Oriental Bank of Commerce(U.P.)
Shri Prasad Second
State Bank of India, Janjgir
(M.P.)
Region "B"
Shri 
Gujarat 
Ahmedabad
(Gujarat)
Shri Shahasroha Second
State Bank of 
Chandigarh
Region "C"
Shri 
Corporation Bank
Guntur
( A.P.)
Shri Second
Bank of India
Hyderabad
( A.P.)
Amirpeth
Patile Haridas 
Regional Office
First K.Anjaneyulu
Centre Employees' Training 
Patiala
Salim Ahmed 
Highcourt Premises Branch
State Bank of India
First R.L.Regar
Champa District - 
Nayak Bhagavat 