The Second meeting of the National Payment Council was held on December 13, 1999 at the
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.  The National Payment Council was  appointed by the Reserve
Bank of India under the guidance of Deputy Governor (Shri S.P. Talwar).  The meeting was
attended by the members, S/Shri A.T.  , Chairman, Union Bank of India, 
, Chairman, Punjab National Bank, V. , Managing Director, State Bank of
India, R.H. , Managing Director, National Stock Exchange, H.N. , Chairman and
Managing Director, ICICI Bank and O.P. , Senior Executive Director, SEBI.  The
Council deliberated on the progress made in upgradation of MICR technology at the four
metropolitan cities by the Reserve Bank of India, setting and operationalisation of MICR cheque
processing at 12 cities ( Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Bangalore, Baroda, Bhopal, Hyderabad, 
Kanpur, Nagpur, Indore and  ), progress of smart card project, Indian Financial
Network (INFINET) and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).  Three presentations were made
on , technology related issues and centralised cheque clearing for banks in
the radius of 100 
The Council after detailed deliberations on the issues raised at the meetings made some
 RTGS should be introduced by October 2000 as originally envisaged by the Reserve Bank
 High value individual transactions in RTGS will have value of Rs.1.00 lakh and above, as
the case at present.
 Collateralised intra-day liquidity should be provided by the Reserve Bank of India in the
form of  sanction of limits with  terms and conditions that needs to be implemented giving
due recognition to risk management.
 The image technology should be introduced at four metropolitan cities before the end of the
Year 2000; the same technology may be made available at other   where MICR
cheque processing is in vogue.
 In the context of the guidelines given for the introduction of debit/smart cards, standards for
smart card for retail payment should be finalised and made operative and smart cards
should be developed in secured environment.  There has to be an appropriate monitoring of
smart card business transactions.  This may have to be taken up by the Reserve Bank of
 Generic architecture for payment system presented by the task force on technology which
involves STAR topology Networking of individual banks and give them bank-level
standardised gateways to INFINET.
:1999-2000/778
Pune, 1
PAGE 
Press Release
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
  vi.
India.
  v.
centres
  iv.
  iii.
  ii.
of India
  i.
important recommendations.
Kms.
intra-day credit facility
Coimbatore
Jaipur,
Gahrotra
Sinor Patil
Janakiraman Jilani
Rashid Selvam Pannir
December 13, 1999
Second Meeting of the National Payments Council