Technical Group on Market Integrity submits Report
June 4, 2002
In the light of recent international developments and recognising the need for a
critical assessment of India’s position vis-à-vis international standards on market
integrity, the Standing Committee in the Reserve Bank of India commissioned an internal
technical group on ‘Market Integrity’. It may be recalled that Standing Committee on
International Financial Standards and Codes was constituted in December 1999 under the
Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India with
Secretary (Economic Affairs), Government of India as Alternate Chairman in order to
identify and monitor developments in global standards and codes, consider aspects of
applicability of these standards to Indian financial system, periodically review the status
and make available its Reports to all concerned organisation in public or private sector.
The Report on Market Integrity, authored by three senior officials of the Reserve
Bank (Shri C.R. Muralidharan, Dr. Himanshu Joshi and Smt. Indrani Banerjee) was
submitted to the Chairman of the Standing Committee on May 30, 2002.
The Report provides an assessment of India’s position with respect to G-7
principles on Market Integrity and Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) on anti-money laundering and terrorist financing which serve as the benchmark
in this regard. The Report also provides an overview of international efforts to combat
money laundering, briefly reviews the existing laws and regulations for the purposes of
detection and law enforcement against criminal activities in financial sector, and notes
the recent initiatives taken for prevention of money laundering.
In accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, it has been
decided to make the Report available to the public for wider discussion. The full text of
the Report of the Technical Group on “Market Integrity” has been placed on the RBI
website www.rbi.org.in
The recommendations contained in this Report are the product of
independent evaluation and assessment of standards and codes and do not reflect
the views of the Reserve Bank or the Government of India or any other concerned
regulatory agencies.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2001-2002/1337