Finance  Minister meets RBI Central Board of Directors
March 16, 2002
The customary post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India
with the Finance Minister was held in New Delhi today.  The meeting was also attended by Shri
B. Vikhe Patil, Minister of State for Banking, Insurance and Expenditure, Shri C.M. Vasudev,
Secretary Economic Affairs, Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Adviser to Finance Minister, Shri C.S. Rao,
Secretary Expenditure and Shri S.K. Purkayastha, Additional Secretary (Financial Sector).
Among the Board Members present were Shri A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, Former Principal Scientific
Adviser to Government of India, Shri Y.H. Malegam, Chartered Accountant, Senior Partner
Billimoria & Company, Shri K. Madhava Rao, State Election Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh,
Prof. Mihir Rakshit, Director, Monetary Research Project, ICRA, Shri K.P. Singh, Chairman,
DLF Group, Shri D.S. Brar, CEO & MD, Ranbaxy Laboratories; Shri N.R. Narayana Murthy,
Chairman & CEO, Infosys Technologies, Shri A.S. Ganguly, Chairman, ICI Ltd., Shri H.P.
Ranina, Advocate, Supreme Court and Shri V.S.Vyas, Economist, Former Director, Institute of
Development Studies, Jaipur.
Welcoming the Honourable Finance Minister, Shri Yashwant Sinha, Minister of State
Shri Vikhe Patil and Secretaries of the Ministry of Finance, Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve
Bank of India said that this year the budget has long term reformist vision.  While several tax
reforms initiated in the past have been continued in the budget, several measures particularly in
the areas of agriculture and infrastructure, have been introduced to impart impetus to further
growth in the economy. He said that the inflationary scenario was highly favourable and he
expected the interest rate environment to remain soft. The world economy is now believed to be
looking up and there were several signs of higher rate of growth in India also thanks to a good
agricultural year, he added.
Describing the Board of the Reserve Bank as one of the most talented and diversified
groups in the country, the Finance Minister explained the background, sectoral thrust, policy
package and reform parameters of the budget. He stated that the budget was formulated in
extremely difficult circumstances, both global and domestic. The budget tried to reconcile the
variety of representations received and the interests of various sections of people, he added. In
terms of sectors, the major focus is on agriculture, which is slated to be one of the triggers for
growth. In addition, infrastructure has been given the pride of place in view of the current stage
of the development of the economy. As regards policies, the budget had to recognise the
importance of fiscal thrust of reviving growth while maintaining reasonable fiscal discipline.
More importantly, the revival of the economy required significant injection of capital at
reasonable interest rates. As far as reform parameters are concerned, the budget recognises thatfor further progress in reforms, the cooperation of State Governments is extremely critical. A
package of incentives as well as collaborative arrangements with states have been put in place
for taking the reform process further. In this regard, special emphasis was laid on improving the
credit delivery system particularly in rural areas as a long term objective. He also explained the
rationale for tax proposals.
Shri Vikhe Patil, Minister of State for Finance, in his remarks emphasised the importance
of rural credit and development of rural areas and infrastructure in the budget. He said that the
prosperity of the economy was closely linked to the prosperity in agriculture, small sector and
rural infrastructure. He asked the Board members for their suggestions, and for further improving
the work of the banking system in these vital areas.
The Directors of RBI complimented the Finance Minister for an excellent job done of
presenting a realistic and reform oriented budget in difficult circumstances. They reiterated that
the high cost of the capital at this juncture was a burden and welcomed the initiatives taken to
soften the interest rate regime.  They, however, sought further work in regard to explaining and
reducing the large spread between the return to the saver and the cost of funds to the borrower.
While endorsing the sectoral thrust, in particular on agriculture, the Directors emphasised
the importance of diversifying agricultural growth to pulses, oilseeds and other high value crops.
They noted in particular, the concerns expressed in the budget in regard to non-performing assets
of the financial sector and the food mountain and felt that priority should continue to be accorded
to these two national concerns.
As regards the tax proposals, they strongly welcomed the steps taken and made some
suggestions for procedural improvements. By and large, they welcomed the rationalisation of
taxation on savings and dividends while increasing the tax net to cover more services.
Complimenting the Finance Minister for bringing speed in the reform process and rationalising
the fiscal system, particularly in bringing fiscal discipline to States, several suggestions were
made for taking further steps in terms of reducing bureaucratic hurdles, removing irritants in
business and putting the tax administration in order. Board members expressed the view that the
budget has got the priorities right and the strategies are proper and hoped that further work at the
ground level would be undertaken to reduce transaction cost, improve the delivery system and
simplify tax administration.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2001-2002/1037