Working Group suggests strengthening of
Information Base on Business Cycle Indicators
July 30, 2002
Strengthening the information base on business cycle indicators, testing various
theories of business cycles in the Indian context and determining the reference cycle
peaks and troughs to date the expansionary and recessionary phases of the economy are
among several recommendations made by a Working Group on Economic Indicators. The
Working Group also recommended considering non-agricultural GDP with quarterly
frequency as an appropriate main reference series for business cycle in India, having
different methodology for forecasting fluctuations in agricultural output, improving the
data base relating to a number of variables such as urban housing, organised employment,
manufacturing and retail inventories, capacity utilisation, consumer confidence,
consumer loans, etc.
The Reserve Bank of India had, in October last year, set up the working group to
suggest suitable approaches for research on relevant economic indicators.  Eminent
economists Prof. Dilip Nachane, Dr. S.L. Shetty, Prof. M.J. Manohar Rao, Shri Saumitra
Chaudhari and Dr. Ila Patnaik were members of the Working Group on Economic
Indicators. Dr. R.B. Barman, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India was the
convenor of the Working Group. The Working Group submitted its report to the Reserve
Bank last month.
In its report, the Working Group addressed a number of issues relating to the
business cycle analysis in the Indian context. These included selection of reference series,
estimation of major aggregates relating to overall economic activity and the related
variables, strengthening the database on inventories, compiling regular estimates of
capacity utilisation, improving the industrial outlook survey and providing an
institutional framework for organised work on dating of business cycles in India
including the compilation of the index of leading indicators on a regular basis. Major
recommendations of the Working Group are:
(i) There is an urgent need to strengthen the information base on business
cycle indicators, test various theories of business cycles in the Indian
context and determine the reference cycle peaks and troughs thereby
dating the expansionary and recessionary phases of the economy.
(ii) In view of the predominant role of weather and the lower role of interplay
of market forces in determining the level of agricultural output, the non-
agricultural GDP (in real terms) with quarterly frequency can be
considered as the appropriate main reference series for business cycle
analysis in India. Indian economy is continually evolving and is far too
complex to be summarised by a single series. Therefore, in addition to the
main reference series, it is also necessary to look at other major activityvariables like private consumption, industrial production and private
corporate sales for determining the reference turning points.
(iii) Indicators for industrial and services output are not appropriate for
predicting movements in agricultural output. Agricultural output, however,
is a strong influence on the aggregate demand. The methodology for
forecasting fluctuations in agricultural output may therefore be different
from that for the rest of the activities.
(iv) Improvements in the database relating to a number of variables relating to
business cycle analysis such as urban housing,  organised employment,
manufacturing and retail inventories, capacity utilisation, consumer
confidence, consumer loans, etc., are also necessary. The present
information base on fiscal and financial sector variables can be explored
for their possible use as leading indicators.
(v) Research on business cycle in the Indian context has been scanty and
confined to empirical aspects. For a better understanding of the
phenomenon, it is necessary to promote research on theoretical aspects,
including testing of competing paradigms on business cycle.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2002/03-108