Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield
August 23, 2002
The banking services should be available in the language of the people. People would
understand the banking schemes designed for them and will be able to take the maximum
benefit out of these schemes only if they are available to them in their own language.  Since
Hindi is spoken in a large part of India, it is appropriate that banking services are made
available in Hindi. This was stated by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a
function held here today to distribute the Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield 2000-2001 to banks
and financial institutions.
The annual Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield was instituted in 1980 to encourage
public sector banks to use Hindi in their day-to-day working. Alongwith the scheme, the
Reserve Bank also conducts a competition for the house journals of banks and financial
institutions. In this competition, it gives prizes for the best bilingual house journal and the
best Hindi house journal. The Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield has been awarded for Region
'A', 'B' and 'C' for the year 2000-01 to Punjab National Bank, Union Bank of India and
Canara Bank, respectively.  The prize for the best bilingual journal has been given to Exim
Bank and that for the best Hindi house journal to Indian Overseas Bank.
While commending  the work being done in the banking industry to implement Hindi,
he pointed out that much was still needed to be done, especially at the higher levels. Progress
of use of Hindi should be reviewed not only at Government-level committee meetings but
also at the administrative office level. In fact, it should be included as a permanent agenda
item for meetings at the administrative level offices, he added. He also urged the banks and
financial institutions to implement the instructions of the President of India relating to
recommendations of the Official Language Implementation Committee.
Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank, while complementing
the winner banks and financial institutions, noted that a good deal of literature is available on
banking in bank offices. As the literature is available in English as well as in Hindi, the
environment was,  ripe for the use of Hindi, he stated. According to him, it was necessary that
"not only we work in Hindi but we also encourage others to work in Hindi". He appealed to
the banks and financial institutions to diligently implement the Government policies. Stating
that alongwith other responsibilities, the bankers also had a responsibility towards Hindi, he
urged the bankers to make every effort to achieve the objective set with regard to
implementing the Official Languages Act.
Earlier Smt. K.J.Udeshi, Executive Director welcomed the Governor, Deputy
Governors and chief executives of banks and financial institutions.
Shri G.K. Sharma, Chief General Manager-in-charge, Department of Administration
and Personnel Management, Reserve Bank of India, proposed a vote of thanks. Dr. Shriniwas
Dwivedi, Officer-in-charge, Rajbhasha Department of the Reserve Bank of India conducted
the programme.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2002-2003/199