RBI rationalises NBFC  Regulations
January 1, 2002
Considering the request from the industry, the Reserve Bank of India has decided to
include loans against hypothecation of automobiles, aircrafts and ships registered with the
concerned authority for the purpose of classification of a non-banking financial company
into equipment leasing and hire purchase finance company.  The Reserve Bank of India
has also underlined a greater role for statutory auditors by reiterating its directions to
report directly to the Reserve Bank the violations or irregularities, if any, noticed by them
in the course of their audit of NBFCs. It has, for this purpose, reminded NBFCs to
include, in their letter of appointment to the auditors, a clause regarding their
responsibility to the Reserve Bank.
These amendments are a part of the overall rationalisation announced by the
Reserve Bank of India today of its regulations for non-banking financial companies
(NBFCs) and residuary non-banking companies (RNBCs).
The Reserve Bank of India has also asked companies whose applications for certificate of
registration have been rejected or companies whose certificate of registration has been
cancelled, to continue to repay their deposits, if any, on due dates and dispose of their
financial assets or convert into non-banking non-financial companies within three years
from the date of rejection/ cancellation.
Giving flexibility to the NBFCs and RNBCs, the Reserve Bank of India has also
now permitted them to keep their mandated securities under the RBI directions with a
depository participant registered with Securities Exchange Board of India, Stock Holding
Corporation of India Ltd. or in constituent's SGL account in addition to the designated
banker.  For this purpose, however, NBFCs or RNBCs will have to take prior written
approval of the Reserve Bank.
While rationalising its regulations for NBFCs and RNBCs, the Reserve Bank has also
brought about some changes to align these regulations with those provided in the
Companies Act as amended by the Companies Amendment Act, 2000. These changes
include reporting to the Company Law Board in case of default in repayment of matured
deposits or interest of small depositors and the requirement of constituting an audit
committee for companies with paid up capital of not less than Rs. 5 crore or asset size of
Rs. 50 crore and above. Further, NBFCs, which were so far a private limited company
but have now become public limited company under the Companies Act because of their
holding public deposits, have been advised to approach the Reserve Bank of India for
change in the certificate of registration to reflect their new name as a public limited
company.
The details of rationalisation announced in regulations are :
(i) The Reserve Bank of India has directed companies, whose application for
certificate of registration have been rejected or companies whose certificate of
registration have been cancelled, to continue to repay their deposits, if any, on due dates
and dispose of their financial assets or convert into non-banking non-financial companies
within three years from date of rejection / cancellation.(iv) NBFCs, which were so far private limited companies but have become public
limited companies under the Companies Act because of their holding public deposits,
have been advised to approach the Reserve Bank of India for change in the certificate of
registration to reflect the new name as public limited company.
(v) The safe custody of securities mandated under Reserve Bank of India directions
are required to be entrusted by NBFCs and RNBCs to a scheduled commercial bank.
They may also be kept with a Depository Participant registered with the Securities and
Exchange Board of India, Stock Holding Corporation of India ltd. or in constituent's SGL
account, with the prior written approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
(vi) Considering the requests from the industry, the Reserve Bank of India has decided
to include loans against hypothecation of all types of automobiles registered with the
Road Transport Authority and charge is recognised under Motor Vehicles Act, aircrafts
registered with Director general of Civil Aviation and ships registered with Director
General of Shipping along with other equipment leasing and hire purchase assets for the
purpose of classification of an NBFC as equipment leasing or hire purchase finance
company.
(vii) Reexamining the issue of valuation of investments in the light of AS-13 of the
Institute of Chartered Accontants of India, companies have been directed to frame
investment policy, classify each investment into current and long term at the time of
making the investment, make inter-class transfer at the lower of book value or market
value without taking advantage of block valuation.  Further, such transfer would be
permissible only at the beginning of half-year and not on an ad-hoc basis.
(viii) The Reserve Bank of India has once again advised NBFCs to include in the letter
of appointment to Statutory Auditors about their responsibility to report directly to the
Reserve Bank the violations or irregularities, if any, noticed by them in the course of their
audit of the NBFC.
(ix) The Reserve Bank has reiterated that every NBFC which is required to maintain
the prescribed minimum capital ratio should maintain such ratio not only as on reporting
dates but on an on-going basis.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/755