Led by India and China, Asian region likely to show
higher growth in 2002 and 2003, says Bimal Jalan
July 8, 2002
The overall growth rate in Asia will increase to about 6 per cent in 2002 and will be
slightly higher in 2003, Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, informed the
central bank governors of major industrial and selected developing countries while reviewing
current global developments. This positive outcome was largely due to the anticipated better
growth rate of 6 per cent in India and over 7 per cent in China. Dr. Bimal Jalan was speaking
at a central bank governors’ conference organised by the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS) in Basel on Sunday. BIS is regarded as the “central banks’ central bank”, and the
conference on “Global Recovery: on Track or Hold” was taking place as a part of the Annual
Meeting of the BIS. Dr. Jalan was invited to the panel by the BIS to provide the emerging
economies’ perspectives along with the Governor of the Swiss National Bank and the
Governor of the Bank of Canada, who gave the industrial countries’ perspective.
     The general consensus was that there were positive signs of global economic recovery.
However, the picture varied a great deal from region to region. It is generally expected that
the countries, which experienced negative growth in 2001, are likely to record positive,
though modest, growth in 2002. High performers of 2001 may exhibit further improvements,
with the magnitude of improvement depending on the pace of recovery in external and
internal demand. The recent signs of recovery in internal demands have improved the
prospects of Asian countries in particular.
    Dr. Jalan emphasised that each emerging market has been affected by global
developments, with the transmission operating through trade flows, financial flows,
deterioration in terms-of-trade and shifts in confidence. The relative importance of each
channel, however, differed across countries. While the Asian region is expected to have been
affected the most through the trade account (due to the high degree of trade openness of some
of these countries), Latin American countries are likely to be more affected by the shocks
transmitting through financial markets (due to their reliance on substantial external financing
and high external debt) and the African countries are expected to be particularly affected by
the deterioration in terms-of-trade. The confidence factor seems to have been important
everywhere.
    Looking ahead to the future, Dr. Bimal Jalan informed the governors that the prospects
of developing countries in the next few years would depend largely on six factors:
? Equity Market Linkages: The greater convergence of the US and emerging
economies’ equity markets remains an important channel of transmission of
shocks. If there is a sudden volatility in the NASDAQ or Dow Jones, the
confidence in the emerging markets are likely to be affected, particularly in new
technology sectors;
? Outlook for Capital Flows (particularly FDI and portfolio):  Capital flows to
emerging markets would depend largely on what happens to the growth prospects
in industrial countries, particularly the United States;
? Commodity Prices: For primary exporting countries, Africa in particular, this is
an important factor;
? Major Currency Alignments (especially in euro, yen and dollar): In the short-
run, appreciation of domestic currency vis-à-vis the dollar makes domesticfinancing cheaper, reducing the debt servicing burden. At the same time, greater
volatility of the exchange rate against major currencies can have destabilising
impacts, particularly on medium-term capital flows;
? Outlook for Official Flows: Private capital flows are highly concentrated and
limited to around 10 countries. For poor countries, official flows are extremely
important. It is heartening to note that the recent G-8 meeting has committed to
enhance official flows to poor countries;
? Finally, Structural Reforms and Sound Macro Policies, particularly control over
fiscal deficits and appropriate management of the external sector.
   Summing up, he said that he was optimistic about the prospects of emerging economies.
With capital mobility, greater commitment to enhance official flows to the poorest
countries, benign inflationary environment, greater access to new technology and
communications, movement towards trade liberalisation, strengthening of foreign
exchange reserves position and commitment to structural reforms, the prospects for
emerging economies, notwithstanding short-term ups and downs, appear to be more
promising in the first decade of the new millennium than in the previous decade.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2002-2003/29