G-20 Meeting
Summary of Lead Remarks by
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India
November 23, 2002
In order to prevent a crisis, each country needs to take measures to build its own
safety walls by providing for a stable macro-economic environment, higher reserves, more
realistic policies to regulate capital flows and careful monitoring of foreign exchange
markets. However, when a crisis does arise because of reasons outside the control of a
country and where the Article IV Consultation with the country have been positive and
favourable, international institutions and international community must resolve to play a
supportive role through a higher and more automatic access to international funding.
This was stated by Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India while making
lead remarks at the session on Crisis Prevention and Resolution at the meeting of G-20
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. The meeting was held in New Delhi today.
Mr. Paul O’Neil, Treasury Secretary, United States of America and Ms. Anne Krueger, First
Deputy Managing Director, International Monetary Fund were among the other panelists.
Japan’s Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Minister of Finance, Germany, Minister of Finance
and Public Credit, Mexico, and speakers from France, Korea, Brazil, South Africa, China,
Russia and U.K.  were among the other lead speakers at the session.
Elaborating on his comments, the Governor stated that a stable macro-economic
environment with low inflation, low current account deficit and reasonable growth was
essential to prevent crises. He pointed out that India had all the three – inflation around 3 per
cent, current account deficit below 1 per cent and growth above 5 per cent.
Adoption of best international practices in respect of prudential, transparency,
accounting and related standard and codes, ensures that there are no surprises about the
financial health of a country or its financial policies. In Dr. Jalan’s view, flexibility in
exchange rates was necessary so that the central bank has the ability to intervene, if and when
necessary.  According to Dr. Jalan, the policy of building a high level of foreign exchange
reserves should take into account not only the anticipated current account deficits but also
liquidity at risk arising from unanticipated capital movements.
In quickly reversing the flows, foreign direct investment and portfolio investment
involve a "cost" to the foreign investor; whereas this cost was  absent in respect of fixed-
interest banking capital, particularly short-term. Dr. Jalan, therefore, advocated that short-
term banking capital should be avoided for financing investments and growth, while foreign
direct investment and portfolio investment have to be encouraged in management of the
capital account.
The Governor also urged international institutions and the international community to
play a supportive role by providing a higher and more automatic access to international
funding to countries facing financial crises.  Governor Jalan pointed out that this was
essential since even if a country was cautious and careful, and had strong macro-economic
fundamentals, it might still be affected by crisis because of events beyond its control. This
could be the result of contagion or an unexpected upsurge in oil prices or disruption of trade
due to external events.Automaticity in access to international finance could be built in for those countries
with whom the annual Article IV consultations have been positive and favourable, the
Governor suggested. Such a move will make Article IV consultations also somewhat more
meaningful than they are now, he pointed out. At the same time, it is necessary to increase
substantially the lendable reserves available with the IMF in line with the increase in the size
of international capital flows in the 90s.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/541