RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2002-03
October 29, 2002
Highlights
• RBI pegs GDP growth at 5.0 to 5.5 per cent despite drought conditions.
• Bank Rate reduced by 0.25 percentage point.
• CRR reduced by 0.25 percentage point.
• Substantial increase in flow of bank credit to industries.  Upturn in
industrial production and buoyancy in exports to sustain growth
• Money supply (M ) contained within the projected trajectory of 14 per
3
cent.
• Decline in reserve money despite large increase in foreign exchange
reserves and significant primary support to government borrowing
programme.
• Bulk of the government borrowing programme completed at lower
interest cost and with longer maturity.
• Inflation to remain benign around 4 per cent despite drought and
pressures on oil prices.
• Sharp reduction in interest rates on various types of government and
corporate papers.
• Reduction in effective lending rates of banks.
• Reserves build up at a low effective cost without adding to external
debt.  The increase in reserves reflects higher remittances, quicker
repatriation of export proceeds and non-debt inflows.
• RBI to continue the monetary policy stance for 2002-03 announced in
April 2002 for the remaining half of the year.
• Monetary and prudential measures towards flexibility
October 29, 2002
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2002-03
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, in a meeting with Chief Executives of major
commercial banks today presented the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit
Policy for 2002-03.  Governor after reviewing macroeconomic and monetary
development indicated that RBI will continue the monetary policy stance for 2002-03
as announced in April 2002 for the remaining part of the year.  He announced a
series of measures for developing technological and institutional infrastructure of the
financial sector and for improving the credit delivery system and highlighted the
following aspects.
GDP Growth 5.0 – 5.5 per cent despite drought2
Reviewing GDP growth for 2002-03, Governor said that while the CSO estimate for
the first quarter of the current year is in line with the projected rate of growth of 6.0 to
6.5 per cent for the year as a whole, the rate of growth in GDP will be lower in view
of the poor rainfall in some parts of the country With indications of recovery in
industrial production, substantially higher growth in infrastructure industries and
impressive export performance, Governor said that the overall GDP growth for the
year 2002-03 is likely to be 5.0 to 5.5 per cent as against the earlier projection of 6.0
to 6.5 per cent.
Substantial flow of bank credit to industries
2. Governor mentioned that there has been an improvement in the growth of
non-food bank credit this year reflecting better outlook for industrial growth.  Apart
from credit growth, various business expectation surveys point to a positive industrial
outlook for the current year.  Food credit, however, declined on account of lower
procurement and higher off-take of foodgrains.
Monetary indicators on projected trajectory
3. Referring to monetary developments, Governor said that on an annual basis,
growth in Money Supply (M ) at 13.2 per cent, net of merger, was in line with the
3 
projected trajectory. The growth in deposits has also been consistent with the
projections made at the beginning of the year in the annual policy Statement.
Another important feature of monetary development during this year has been the
reduction in reserve money despite liquidity pressure emanating from increase in
RBI’s foreign currency assets as also primary support to the Government’s
borrowing programme.
Inflation to remain benign
4. Governor mentioned that inflation in the current year is more evenly spread
across major sub-groups.  The annual inflation, on a point-to-point basis, was 2.8 per
cent on October 12, 2002 as against 3.0 per cent a year ago. While the deficiency in
rainfall caused pressure on the prices of many agricultural commodities, the
domestic inflation outlook still looks comfortable and the inflation rate is likely to be
around 4.0 per cent, which is in line with the expectations in the annual policy
Statement of 2002-03.
RBI continues with the present debt management strategy
5. Elaborating on debt management strategy, Governor explained that RBI
continues to combine auction issues with acceptance by private placement of dated
securities consistent with market conditions. Because of the existing liquidity
conditions in the market and low inflation, the Government has been able to borrow
at a substantially lower cost during 2002-03. The monetary impact of private
placement, however, was neutralised by conduct of outright OMO sales of
government securities.
Financial Markets stable3
6. Highlighting financial market developments, Governor said, financial markets
in India have been generally stable, liquidity has been adequate, and the interest
rate environment has also been favourable to promote investments.  A steady
increase in net foreign currency assets of the Reserve Bank combined with lower
than anticipated level of real economic activity, created a situation of excess liquidity
during most part of the current year so far. The Reserve Bank, therefore, had to
actively manage liquidity not only through outright OMO sales of securities but also
through its daily Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF).
Decline in interest rates across various segments
7. Dwelling on interest rate scenario, Governor said, reflecting easy liquidity
conditions, interest rates continued to maintain their downward trend. The spread
between AAA rated corporate bonds and government securities has narrowed
considerably over the last six months in the wake of improved industrial outlook. The
public sector banks have reduced their deposit rates.  In consonance with lower cost
of funds, some banks have reduced their prime lending rates (PLRs).  Since banks
are lending below their PLRs and also reduced their maximum spread over PLR, the
effective lending rates of banks have shown some moderation. The weighted
average call money rate has come down from over 13.06 per cent in August 2000 to
5.74 per cent by October 2002.  The yields on government securities with 1-year and
10-year residual maturities fell from 10.82 per cent and 11.47 per cent in August
2000 to 5.92 per cent and 7.07 per cent, respectively, by October 2002.
8. Referring to the substantial reduction in interest rates achieved in the recent
period, Governor expressed satisfaction and said that this is in line with the
announced policy of the Reserve Bank.  He added that this combined with a benign
inflationary environment, is a welcome development which augurs well for industrial
recovery and sustained growth in the economy.
India to perform better than other economies
9. Highlighting the developments in the world economy, Governor said that the
prospects for recovery in the world economy, now appears to be somewhat slower
than that anticipated earlier.  However, in terms of relative performance, India and
China are anticipated to perform better than the global trend.
Exchange rate policy has stood the test of time
10. Elaborating on foreign exchange management, Governor said that the recent
experience has once again highlighted the need for developing countries to keep a
continuous vigil on market developments and build adequate safety nets that can
withstand the effects of unexpected shocks and market uncertainties.  In this context,
India’s current exchange rate policy has stood the test of time.  It has focused on the
management of volatility without a fixed rate target, while the underlying demand and
supply conditions are allowed to determine the exchange rate movements over a
period in an orderly way. Recent international research on viable exchange rate
strategies in emerging markets has also lent considerable support to the exchange
rate policy followed in India.4
Forex Reserves at all time high
11. Governor indicated that India’s foreign exchange reserves have increased
sharply from US $ 45.2 billion as on October 26, 2001 to US $ 64.0 billion by
October 25, 2002, an increase of US $ 18.8 billion. The overall approach to the
management of India’s foreign exchange reserves in recent years has reflected the
changing composition of balance of payments, and has endeavoured to reflect the
“liquidity risks” associated with different types of flows and other requirements such
as the size of the current account deficit; the size of short-term liabilities (including
current repayment obligations on long-term loans); the possible variability in portfolio
investment and other types of capital flows; the unanticipated pressures on the
balance of payments arising out of external shocks; and movements in the
repatriable foreign currency deposits of  Non-resident Indians (NRIs).
Cost of additional reserves quite low
12. Referring to the recent debate regarding the cost and benefit of holding
reserves, Governor said that sharp exchange rate movements can be highly
disequilibrating and costly for the economy during periods of uncertainty or adverse
expectations. The economic costs are likely to be substantially higher than the net
financial cost, if any, of holding reserves.  In the last few years almost the whole of
addition to reserves has been made without increasing the overall level of external
debt.  The increase in reserves largely reflects higher remittances, quicker
repatriation of export proceeds and non-debt inflows.  Even after taking into account
foreign currency denominated NRI flows, the financial cost of additional reserve
accretion in India in the recent period is quite low and is likely to be more than off set
by the return on additional reserves.
Release of counterpart domestic currency in lieu of net purchases in the
foreign market
13. Governor also mentioned that most of the increase in reserves in the recent
period is through net purchases by RBI in the domestic forex market, for which an
equivalent amount of domestic currency has been released to the concerned
domestic entities, including public sector units, corporates and individuals.  The
decision on use of this counterpart domestic currency released by RBI (i.e. for
investment, deposits or as liquid assets, etc.) is the responsibility of the above
mentioned entities and, not that of the RBI, or for that matter, the Government of
India.  Needless to add that to the extent that this counterpart local currency is used
by recipient entities for further investment in the economy, the impact on industrial
demand and growth would be favourable.
Export credit delivery system to be customer- friendly
14. Governor said that export performance during the current year has been
encouraging and it is expected that the current account deficit for the year would be
below 1.0 per cent of GDP and no significant pressures on balance of payments are
expected on this account.  The Reserve Bank has started making available on its
website the reference rate for the euro in addition to the US dollar. Governor urged
that it will be desirable if more and more of our trade to the euro area is also invoiced5
in the euro. Governor emphasised that sustained efforts towards accelerating the
growth of exports becomes imperative for long-term viability of the balance of
payments as well as for increasing income and employment opportunities.  Governor
urged that banks should continue with their efforts to make the export credit delivery
system customer-friendly and efficient at the branch levels, particularly, in areas with
concentration of small and medium sized exporters.
Procedures/documentations minimised for individuals
15. Governor indicated that procedures for financial transactions such as
remittances, investments and maintenance of bank accounts, etc., for non-residents
have been simplified considerably in the recent past. The policy framework
governing inward foreign direct investment (FDI) was substantially liberalised under
the automatic route.  Continuing with the policy of progressive liberalisation of the
capital account, NRI deposit schemes were also rationalised and are now fully
convertible (with the exception of NRO accounts).  In order to facilitate the external
commercial borrowings of corporates, the Reserve Bank allowed corporates, on a
case by case basis, to credit even higher proportions of export proceeds to their
EEFC accounts so that they can take advantage of lower interest rates and prepay
their ECBs. Governor emphasised the need to monitor large exposures to such
corporates against unhedged exposures.
Stance of Monetary Policy to continue
16. Spelling out the stance of monetary policy, Governor said, consistent with
price stability, RBI will continue to ensure that all legitimate requirements for credit
are adequately met.  Towards this end, RBI will continue its policy of active demand
management of liquidity through OMO including LAF, and using the policy
instruments at its disposal as and when the situation warrants. The outlook for
industrial growth and exports during the year 2002-03 remains positive.  This
scenario coupled with a moderate level of global inflation, the inflationary outlook on
the domestic economy continues to be favourable. The Reserve Bank, therefore,
proposes to continue with the overall stance of monetary policy announced in the
April policy Statement for 2002-03 for the remaining half of the current year.
17. Governor recalled that the annual policy Statement of April 2002 had
indicated that under normal conditions and barring emergence of any adverse and
unexpected developments in the various sectors of the economy, the overall stance
of monetary policy for 2002-03 will be:
• Provision of adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support investment
demand in the economy while continuing a vigil on movements in the price
level.
• In line with the above, to continue the present stance on interest rates
including preference for soft interest rates.
• To impart greater flexibility to the interest rate structure in the medium-term.
Elongation of maturities in Government securities at lower costs6
18. Governor indicated that monetary management in the first half of 2002-03 was
largely in conformity with the monetary policy stance announced in the annual policy
Statement of April 2002. As spelt out in the policy Statement, RBI has been able to
maintain a stable interest rate regime throughout the first half of the year with a bias
towards softening of interest rates.  Nearly two-thirds of the market borrowing
programme of the Government could be completed at a lower cost, with longer
maturities and without any adverse impact on the general interest rate structure. The
maximum maturity was gradually elongated from 20 years during 1998-99 to 30
years in 2002-03.  Simultaneously the weighted average maturity has increased
substantially from 5.7 years in 1995-96 to 14.26 years in 2001-02.  On the other
hand, the average cost of issuance has come down from 13.75 per cent to 9.44 per
cent over the same period.  Further, certain innovations were also brought into the
instruments like floating rate bonds and allowing put/call options in the government
securities.
Further flexibility in interest rates
19. Referring to interest rate flexibility, Governor said that banks were urged to
devise schemes for encouraging depositors to convert their existing long-term fixed
rate past deposits into variable rate deposits.  It is expected that such efforts would,
over time, enable banks to reduce to some extent, the downward inflexibility in the
interest rate structure. Governor urged banks to review the maximum spread over
PLR and reduce their interest rates wherever unreasonably high so that credit could
be available to the borrowers at reasonable interest rates. The measures apart from
generating healthy competition among banks, are expected to improve banking
facility available to depositors and make them more responsive to changes in the
overall financial and inflationary environment. Governor said that the Reserve Bank
will be pursuing these issues further and welcomes any suggestions in this regard.
20. Governor mentioned that the softer interest rates prevailing in the economy in
the recent period, is sustainable in the medium/long term if the rate of inflation
continues to be low.  An important objective of monetary, fiscal and supply
management policies must be to ensure that there is no resurgence of inflationary
pressures in the economy.
21. Governor reviewed the progress made in respect of structural measures
indicated for increasing the operational efficiency of monetary policy, improving the
regulatory and supervisory functions of the Reserve Bank and strengthening the
prudential and supervisory norms along with developing technological and
institutional infrastructure of the financial sector and improving the credit delivery
system. Governor also announced certain further structural and other policy
measures.
Monetary Measures
(a) Bank Rate
• The Bank Rate is reduced by 0.25 percentage point from 6.50 per cent with
effect from the close of business of October 29, 2002.7
22. Commenting on the Bank Rate reduction, Governor stated that under the
circumstances, as the present level of the Bank Rate as well as call money and other
money market rates are quite comfortable and there is a sizeable gap between these
rates and the average lending rates of banks, no useful purpose is likely to be served
by a further reduction in the Bank Rate in the near future.  Unless circumstances
change, the policy bias in regard to the Bank Rate is to keep it stable at the present
level at least until the end of the financial year.
(b) Repo Rate
• The repo rate under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of RBI to be made
available on October 30, 2002, is also being reduced by 0.25 percentage
point.  Subsequently, the auction method for repos will continue as previously.
23. Governor clarified that while repo auctions are conducted without any
preannounced rate and bids are accepted on the basis of uniform price method, RBI
has retained the option to switch over to fixed rate repos on overnight basis.  RBI will
continue to use this flexibility of switching over between the options so as to make
efficient use of the LAF system in the daily liquidity management.
(c) Cash Reserve Ratio
24. As a further step in moving towards the statutory level of CRR of 3.0 per cent,
Governor proposed:
• To reduce CRR from 5.0 per cent to 4.75 per cent effective from the fortnight
beginning November 16, 2002. (With this reduction, CRR has been reduced
by as much as 3.75 percentage points over the past two years).
• To raise the minimum daily maintenance of CRR of banks to 80 per cent of
required amount with effect from fortnight beginning November 16, 2002.  The
minimum level of 80 per cent would be applicable for all the days in a
reporting fortnight.
(d) Interest on Cash Balances Maintained with RBI under CRR
25. Governor proposed:
• To pay interest on eligible CRR balances on a monthly basis with effect from
April 2003.  In order to facilitate this, banks are urged to put in place proper
technology including adoption of the software package which will help
transmission of Form A data by banks directly to RBI.
(e) Statutory Liquidity Ratio of Regional Rural Banks
26. Governor proposed:
• SLR holdings of RRBs in the form of deposits with sponsor banks maturing
beyond March 31, 2003 may be allowed to be retained till maturity. These
deposits may be converted into government securities, on maturity, in8
case the concerned RRBs have not achieved the 25 per cent minimum
level of SLR in government securities by that time.
• Although deposits with sponsor banks contracted before April 30, 2002
would be reckoned for SLR purpose till maturity, RRBs are advised to
achieve the target of maintaining 25 per cent SLR in government securities
out of the maturity proceeds of such deposits with sponsor banks as well
as from their incremental public deposits at the earliest.
Interest Rate Policy
(a) Interest Rate Flexibility
27. Governor said that the recent monetary policy Statements have been drawing
attention to factors causing rigidities in the structure of interest rates, particularly in
the lending rates of commercial banks.  There has been some improvement with
regard to NPAs, operating expenses and cost of funds of commercial banks. In order
to further improve flexibility, banks have been given freedom to decide the period of
reset on variable rate deposits.
(b) Prime Lending Rate and Spread
28. Governor explained that in the current environment of low inflation,
unreasonably wide spreads could adversely affect the overall credit portfolio of
banks. Furthermore, very wide spreads provide opportunities for non-transparency.
In order to ensure appropriate pricing of loans, banks are encouraged to review both
their PLRs and spreads and align spreads within reasonable limits around PLR
subject to approval of their Boards.
(c) Interest Rates on Deposits by Co-operative Banks/Regional Rural
Banks/Local Area Banks
29. Governor indicated that interest rates on deposits have been deregulated
except deposits in savings bank accounts, which is currently prescribed by RBI.
However, discretion was given to Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)/Local Area Banks
(LABs)  and co-operative banks (Urban/Central/State) to pay additional interest.  In
order to remove these anomalies, Governor suggested the following measures for
implementation as early as possible:
• Sponsor banks are encouraged not to pay interest on the current accounts
maintained by RRBs with them.
• Co-operative banks are encouraged not to pay interest on current accounts.
• RRBs/LABs and co-operative banks are encouraged not to pay any additional
interest on the savings bank accounts over and above what is payable by
commercial banks.
(d) Interest Rates Export Credit in rupee terms9
30. With a view to encouraging competition among banks and also to increase
flow of credit to export sector, Governor proposed to liberalise interest rates on rupee
export credit in two phases. Accordingly, in the first phase, it is proposed that:
• The ceiling rate of PLR plus 0.5 percentage point on pre-shipment credit
beyond 180 days and up to 270 days and post-shipment credit beyond 90
days and up to 180 days will be deregulated with effect from May 1, 2003.
Banks would have freedom to charge PLR or sub-PLR rates subject to
approval of their Boards.
• In the second phase, with effect from a date to be announced later, it will be
considered whether the ceiling rates on pre-shipment credit up to 180 days
and post-shipment credit up to 90 days should also be discontinued to
encourage greater competition in the interest of exports.
(e) Flexibility in the Repayment of Export Credit
31. Imparting flexibility in the repayment of export credit, Governor proposed that:
• Subject to mutual agreement between the exporter and the banker, the
repayment/prepayment of pre-shipment credit would henceforth be permitted.
For this purpose, balances held in the EEFC account of the exporter can also
be used.
(f) Interest Rate on FCNR (B) Deposits
32. Governor stated that banks are free to decide FCNR (B) deposit rates
denominated in Japanese Yen which may be equal to or less than LIBOR/SWAP
rates of corresponding maturities till further notice.  Interest rate ceiling on FCNR (B)
deposits denominated in other currencies will remain unchanged at the prevailing
level of LIBOR/SWAP rates of corresponding maturities minus 25 basis points.
Short-term Liquidity Assessment Model
33. Governor informed that a short-term liquidity forecasting model, developed
under the guidance of eminent academic experts, is currently being used for internal
evaluation and information. The generic form of the model has also been made
available at the Bank’s website for wider public debate.
Money Market
34. Governor indicated that a number of structural measures have been initiated
to ensure balanced development of various segments of the money market as also
to preserve the integrity and transparency. While implementing these measures, it is
desirable to take cognisance of the progress of developments made in other
markets/payments system infrastructure, e.g., the repo market, operationalisation of
NDS/CCIL etc. In this context, Governor announced the following additional
measures :
(a) Rationalisation of Standing Facilities10
35. With the emergence of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) as the primary
instrument for modulating systemic liquidity on a day to day basis, the usage of
export credit refinance (ECR) facility has gone down substantially in the recent
period. With a view to furthering the process of phasing out sector-specific standing
facility in an environment of low CRR, Governor proposed:
• Apportionment of normal and back-stop facilities which is presently in the ratio
of two-thirds to one-third (67:33) will be changed to one-half (50:50) each from
the fortnight beginning November 16, 2002.
(b) Certificates of Deposit
36. With a view to providing more flexibility for pricing of CDs and to give
additional choice to both investors and issuers.
• Banks and FIs may issue CDs on floating rate basis provided the
methodology of computing the floating rate is objective, transparent and
market-based.
(c) OTC Rupee Derivatives
37.In order to enlarge the menu for managing interest rate risks for banks and other
financial intermediaries as well as corporates in the rupee derivatives market,
Governor proposed:
• To set up a Working Group with appropriate representations from the market
to look into, inter alia, the possible ways of extending types of derivatives that
are available in the foreign currency segment to rupee derivatives.  The Group
will also review the guidelines for OTC rupee derivatives in India and suggest
further developments in this market.
Government Securities Market
38. Governor said that in an effort to provide further transparency and stability in
the government securities market, a number of measures have been put in place by
RBI during 2002-03 so far.  These measures, inter alia, include an announcement of
a half-yearly calendar for Government of India dated securities, holding of
government securities by both wholesale and retail investors in dematerialised form,
arranging NDS data almost on real-time basis to the RBI website for market
participants etc.  RBI has also been making sustained efforts to increase the investor
base of government securities market by encouraging retailing of government
securities and making CSGL account holders eligible for the repo market. It is also
attempting to impart greater flexibility to both issuers and investors of government
securities through introducing STRIPS, floating rate bonds and bonds with call/put
option.  In this direction, Governor announced the following further initiatives.
(a) Trading in Stock Exchanges11
39. In order to enlarge the number of participants and to provide countrywide
access to government securities, it is proposed to introduce anonymous screen
based order driven trading in government securities on the stock exchanges.  The
scheme will be placed for comments from market participants/public on the website
of RBI and SEBI.
(b) Extension of Repo to CSGL Account Holders
40. Governor proposed to extend repo eligibility to select category of non-SGL
account holders with adequate safeguards to ensure 'Delivery Versus Payment' and
transparency.
(c) Guidelines for Uniform Accounting of Repo/Reverse Repo
Transactions between Banks
41. Governor mentioned that as banks are not following an uniform accounting
system for repo/reverse repo transactions, draft guidelines on ‘Uniform Accounting
Norm for Repo Transactions’ on the lines suggested by a Sub-Group of TAC were
circulated to banks and FIMMDA for their comments.
(d) Development of the Repo Market
42. In order to facilitate phasing out of non-bank participants from call/notice
money market as also to impart more flexibility to the repos market, Governor
proposed to permit rollover of repos using the same securities between the same
counterparties. Further measures for developing repo market may be considered in
consultation with experts and participants at a later stage.
(e) Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO)
43. The Reserve Bank has been promoting collateralised lending/ borrowing
operations by market participants so that their reliance on call/notice money market
may be reduced.  In this direction, Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligation
(CBLO), a product developed by CCIL for its members was considered.  Accordingly
:
• CBLO would be considered as a money market instrument with original
maturity between one day and upto one year.  There will be no restrictions on
the minimum denomination as well as lock-in period for its secondary market
transactions.  The regulatory provisions for CBLO will be the same as
applicable to other money market instruments.  Since CBLO is fully
collateralised by government securities, the risk weight as applicable to
government securities for market risk will be applicable to CBLO.  Detailed
operating instructions in this regard will be issued by RBI separately.
(f)  NDS Data on website
44. Governor indicated that with the operationalisation of NDS, price and trade
information on government securities and related data reported on NDS is now
available on the RBI website on real time basis.12
Credit Delivery Mechanism
(a) Priority Sector Lending
(i) Agriculture
45. In order to improve credit delivery to the priority sector and in particular to
agriculture, Governor proposed:
• The limit of advances granted to dealers in drip irrigation/sprinkler irrigation
system/agricultural machinery, located in rural/semi-urban areas is being
increased from Rs.10 lakh to Rs. 20 lakh under priority sector lending for
agriculture.
(ii) Small Business and Weaker Sections
46. In order to further increase credit flow to the small business and to weaker
sections, Governor proposed:
• To increase the existing limit of Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh without any ceiling
for working capital.  Further, banks are free to fix individual limits for working
capital depending upon the requirements of different activities.
• To increase the individual credit limit to artisans, village and cottage industries
to Rs.50, 000 from the existing limit of Rs.25,000. The limits will be under the
overall limit of 25 per cent advances to weaker sections under priority sector
or 10 per cent of net bank credit.
(iii) Repairs of Damaged Houses in Rural and other Areas.
• To increase the existing limit of housing loans for repairing damaged houses
from Rs.50,000 to Rs.1 lakh in rural and semi-urban areas and to Rs.2 lakh in
urban areas.
(b) Micro Finance
47.  Governor indicated that the Reserve Bank’s objective has been to accelerate
the flow of bank credit to micro finance institutions while maintaining their
decentralised, voluntary and non-bureaucratic character.  Banks were also allowed
to classify their credit under the SHG-bank linkage programme as advances to
weaker sections. The SHG-bank linkage programme proved that banking for the
poor was a viable proposition.  Considering the fact that the recovery rate has been
very high in respect of banks’ advances to SHGs and the SHG bank linkage
programme helps the poor, Governor proposed:
• Unsecured advances given by banks to SHGs against group guarantees
would be excluded for the purpose of computation of the prudential norms on
unsecured guarantees and advances until further notice.  The matter would13
be reviewed after a year in the light of growth in aggregate unsecured
advances, and the recovery performance of advances to SHGs.
Urban Co-operative Banks
 Proposal for an Apex Supervisory Body
48. Governor mentioned that RBI had again drawn the attention to the present
system of dual/triple regulatory and supervisory control (involving Centre, Sates and
RBI) and stated that it is not conducive to efficient functioning of the co-operative
banks in the interest of their depositors. Accordingly, RBI mooted a proposal to set
up a separate supervisory authority in the interest of the public depositors, with
representatives of Centre, State and other interested elements.  This important issue
was examined recently by a Committee under the Chairmanship of Hon. Minister of
State for Finance.  The Committee while agreeing that the duality of control should
be done away with, recommended that RBI should be vested with full powers for
regulation and supervision of UCBs.  Governor assured that while RBI will do its best
in implementing the decisions of the Government in this regard, it may be kept in
view that in case immediate measures are not taken to remove duality of control, it
will be difficult to make the supervisory system effective.
Supervision and Monitoring
(a) Risk Based Supervision
49. Governor stressed that RBI would switch over to risk based supervision of
banks by 2003 and accordingly certain change management processes were
initiated by the Project Implementation Group formed for the purpose.
(b) Consolidated Accounting and Supervision
50. Governor mentioned that in order to provide enabling provisions to facilitate
consolidated accounting and quantitative methods under Indian conditions, a
working arrangement with other regulators viz. SEBI and IRDA, for sharing of
information by way of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is being explored.
Prudential Measures
51. Governor said that prudential regulation and supervision have formed a
critical component of the financial sector reform process since the beginning and
these norms have been progressively tightened over the years in line with
international best practices.
(a) Time Table for Adoption of 90 days Norm for Recognition of Loan
Impairment by State Co-operative Banks (SCBs) /  District Central Co-
operative Banks (DCCBs)
52. With a view to moving towards international best practices and to ensure
greater transparency, commercial banks were advised to adopt 90 days norm for
recognition of loan impairment from the year ending March 31, 2004.  In order to14
have a consistent and uniform approach towards all segments of the banking
system, Governor proposed:
• To extend the 90 days norm to the SCBs and DCCBs from the year ending
March 31, 2006.  To facilitate smooth transition, banks are advised to move
over to charging interest on monthly rests effective April 1, 2004.
(b) New Capital Accord
53. Governor mentioned that the Reserve Bank is continuing its efforts towards
obtaining international agreement on the proposals on the New Capital Accord so
that in its final version due next year, it would provide sufficient  flexibility for national
regulation to take into account the differences in institutional framework and capacity
in different countries, including developing countries.  In various international fora
where this issue is being discussed, RBI and several other supervisory agencies
have proposed that for non-complex banks, national authorities should have the
discretion to use simpler methodologies for calculation of risk-weighted capital
requirements. Governor expressed satisfaction that the Basel Committee is
responding to these concerns.
54. Governor informed that India is also participating in the Quantitative Impact
Study (QIS 3) being conducted by the Basel Committee to assess the impact of the
New Accord and RBI has constituted a group of seven banks (three public sector
banks, two new private banks and two old private banks) that have begun
participating in the exercise.
(c)  Banks’ Entry into Insurance Business Referral Arrangement
55. Governor said that under the referral arrangement, banks provide physical
infrastructure within their select branch premises to insurance companies for selling
their insurance products to the banks’ customers with adequate disclosure and
transparency, and in turn earn referral fees on the basis of premia collected.
Accordingly, a few banks have been permitted to enter into referral arrangements
with insurance companies subject to certain conditions to protect the interests of
their customers.
(d) Technical Committee on Market Integrity
56. Governor mentioned that the Report of an internal technical Group which
assessed India’s position vis-à-vis international standards on ‘market integrity’ has
been placed on the RBI Website for wider dissemination.
(e) Guidelines on ‘Know Your Customer’ Norms and Cash Transactions
57. Governor advised banks  to put in place a sound Know Your Customer
policy, adopt anti-money laundering measures comprising systems and procedures
for customer identification while opening accounts, institute internal control and audit
mechanism, and lay down risk management and monitoring procedures.
(f) Offshore Banking Units in Special Economic Zones15
58. Governor said that RBI has formulated a scheme of Off-shore Banking Units
in Special Economic Zones as branches of banks operating in India and obtained the
approval of the Government.
(g) Prudential Guidelines on Non-SLR Investments by Banks and
Financial Institutions
59. Governor informed that draft prudential guidelines on management of non-
SLR investment portfolio have been referred to the RBI-SEBI Technical Committee
to take a view on disclosure and regulation of private placement.
(h) Country Risk Management
60. Governor said that draft guidelines on country risk management together with
a ‘Note for Discussion’ were forwarded to banks and were also placed on RBI
website seeking comments/views thereon.
(i) Investment Fluctuation Reserve
61. Governor recalled that with a view to building up of adequate reserves to
guard against any possible reversal of interest rate environment in future, banks
were advised to build up Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR). As per the extant
guidelines, banks are required to build up IFR of a minimum 5 per cent within a
period of  5 years. The IFR as at end March 2002 constituted 0.91 per cent of the
relevant category of investment.
Review of Various Working Groups by the Reserve Bank
62. Governor indicated that as a part of the consultative process in initiating
financial sector reforms, RBI has constituted a number of Working Groups on various
policy issues, with members drawn from banks, market participants and experts in
the relevant areas.  Working Groups were also set up for suggesting road maps for
implementation of international best systems and practices in the financial sector
with particular reference to the banking sector. The reports of the Working Groups
were examined internally and were also put on RBI website where necessary for
wider dissemination and comments.  The progress of the Working Groups was
reviewed in Annex I.
Technology Upgradation
63. Governor said that an important objective of the programme for technology
upgradation in our financial sector is to link various payment and settlement systems
into an efficient and integrated system.  The roadmap for development is provided in
the ‘Payment System Vision Document’.  In this direction, Governor reviewed further
steps taken by RBI in this regard and reviewed the progress in Annex II.
Legal Reforms16
64. Governor said that RBI has proposed for consideration of the Government,
various amendments to the existing Acts in order to provide more flexibility in day-to-
day operations.  He further mentioned that some of the proposals are at various
levels of consideration of the Government and gave a detail account in Annex III.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press  Release : 2002-2003/445