Reserve Bank of India brings ECB Pre-payment
on Automatic Route as an Experiment
August 5, 2002
At present the Reserve Bank of India considers  applications for prepayment of External
Commercial Borrowings  (ECBs) under the following categories:
(a) The applications where the amount of prepayment of ECB is fully matched by
way of inflow of foreign exchange in form of foreign investment in the
applicant company.
(b) The applications where the prepayment of External Commercial Borrowings
is being made out of the balance held in the Exchange Earner's Foreign
Currency (EEFC) account of the borrower.
(c) Prepayment of ECB to the extent of 10% of the outstanding loan, once during
the entire currency of the loan.
(d) The applications for prepayment of loan where the residual maturity of the
loan does not exceed one year.
In line with the Reserve Bank’s approach for simplification of procedures and
extending facilities under automatic route, it has been decided, on experimental basis, to
introduce an automatic route for prepayment of external commercial borrowings. The
automatic route for prepayment of ECB will be available upto March 31, 2003, for
following categories:
(i) the prepayment of External Commercial Borrowings falling under
categories (a) & (b) above, without any limit,
(ii) the borrowers following under category (c) & (d) above, may also
prepay the loans upto an amount not exceeding USD 50 million, without
prior permission of the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank would,
however, also expeditiously consider applications for prepayment of
amounts exceeding USD50 million, particularly in cases where such
loans were contracted at interest rates significantly higher than the
present rates.
Designated branches of Authorised Dealers may, accordingly, allow such
remittances for prepayment of ECB, after obtaining a certificate from auditors indicating
that the applicant (i) is eligible for prepayment under automatic route (ii) has availed of
the ECB in accordance with all relevant Acts, Rules/Regulations and Guidelines and  (iii)
has submitted the ECB-2 Returns to the Reserve Bank . The authorised dealers are
required to report to the Reserve Bank of India, Exchange Control Department, CentralOffice, Mumbai, full details of the prepayment in the prescribed form within seven days
of the remittance, as per circular being issued separately.
The facility under the automatic route for prepayment of ECBs as per this scheme,
will be available up to March 31, 2003. A new circular will be issued on or before that
date in case the scheme needs to be  extended for a further period.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 2002-2003/131