Auction of 10-year Government of India Stock
with Call and Put Options
July 12, 2002
The Government of India will for the first time, sell by auction a new 10-year
Government Stock on July 17, 2002 (Wednesday). The Stock, with call and put options
will be for a notified amount of Rs.3,000 crore. It will be sold through a yield based
auction using uniform price auction method. The issuance of the Government Stock
with call and put options is being made for the first time on an experimental basis.
Fresh issuance of Government securities with such features will depend on the response
and the experience gained over time.
Under the call option the Government will have the discretion to prematurely
redeem the Government Stock at par, after giving a public notice of two months, on any
coupon payment date on or after completion of five years from the date of issuance of
the Government Stock. Similarly, under the put option the holders of the Government
Stock will have the option to offer the Government Stock for premature redemption at
par, after giving a notice of two months, on any coupon payment date on or after
completion of five years from the date of issuance of the Government Stock. In both
the events, interest will cease to accrue on the redeemed Government Stock from the
coupon payment date of premature redemption.
The Government Stock up to 5 per cent of the notified amount of the sale, i.e.,
Rs.150 crore will be allotted to the eligible individuals and institutions under the Scheme
for Non-Competitive Bidding Facility in the auction of Government Securities.
 The auction will be conducted by the Reserve Bank of India at its  Mumbai
Office, Fort, Mumbai. Applicants who wish to bid for the Stock will have to clearly
indicate in the prescribed form (obtainable from the Regional Director, RBI, Mumbai
Office, Fort, Mumbai) the nominal value of the Stock applied for, and the yield expected
by them (up to two decimal places). The competitive bids by the NDS members should
be submitted only in electronic format using NDS, while all the non-competitive bids
should be submitted in the prescribed physical form.  All bids must be submitted by
2.30 P.M.
The results of the auctions will be announced on July 17, 2002 (Wednesday) and
payment by successful bidders will be during banking hours on July 18, 2002
(Thursday). The new stock will qualify for the ready forward (repo) facility.
Bids for underwriting of the Stock under auction can be submitted by the
Primary Dealers in the Government Securities Market up to 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, July
16, 2002 to the Chief General Manager, Internal Debt Management Cell, Reserve Bank
of India, Central Office, Fort, Mumbai 400 001.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/49