Annual Report of the Reserve Bank of India for 2001-02
August 30, 2002
The Annual Report of the Reserve Bank of India for the year 2001-02 is released today.
The Report presents the Annual Accounts of the Reserve Bank and its working and operations
for the year ended June 30, 2002. The Report also presents a review of the Indian economy
during 2001-02 and prospects for the near- and medium-term.
In the year 2001-02, India was among the strongest growing economies in the world,
notwithstanding an international environment bound down by the synchronised weakness
affecting large parts of the global economy. Agriculture performance was robust with the
stock of foodgrains crossing 63 million tonnes. With the posting of a modest current account
surplus after 24 years and the continuing strength of the capital flows, India’s foreign
exchange reserves rose to US $ 60.6 billion, placing India among the top reserve holding
emerging market economies. Monetary and financial conditions remained stable in 2001-02
as well as in the first few months of the current year. There was a distinct easing of
inflationary pressures.
The macroeconomic prospects for the current year 2002-03 are mixed. On the one hand,
financial, liquidity and inflationary conditions and the external sector are highly favourable
for higher growth. On the other hand, the agricultural outlook is sombre with likelihood of
widespread drought.  This may also adversely affect the incipient industrial recovery. On
balance, there is a strong possibility that the growth rate of 6.0 to 6.5 per cent projected in the
Annual Monetary and Credit Policy Statement (April 2002), which was based on the
assumption of a normal monsoon, will not be realised.  A re-assessment of the projected
growth rate for the current year will be attempted in the mid-term review of the Monetary and
Credit Policy in October 2002, by which time reliable information regarding the effects of
drought on the agricultural and industrial output will be available.
The monetary and credit policy for 2002-03 has been reinforced by favourable
developments in the form of low inflation, ample liquidity in financial markets,   continuing
capital inflows and a substantial build up of foreign exchange reserves. The policy stance
continues to ensure that all legitimate requirements of credit are met consistent with price
stability, with the outlook biased towards a soft and a more flexible interest rate structure in
the medium term. Monetary policy has been imbued with a flexible approach and markets are
being prepared for shifts in stance if a change in circumstances warrant a tightening.
Considerable progress has been achieved in financial sector reforms in India in terms of
setting out the objectives, the framework and the timetable. India’s position on international
standards and codes in respect of the financial sector has been placed in the public domain.
Expert assessment, both internal and external, of the applicability of these world’s best
practices to the specifics of the Indian situation has also been undertaken to enable an
unbiased public assessment of the announced resolve to converge to international norms, with
the speed and content modulated to the country-specific case. The focus of financial sectorreforms is now on the implementation of the agenda of reforms over a wide area involving
financial markets, financial intermediaries and the regulatory and supervisory function.
In sum, the Indian economy seems to have acquired a remarkable degree of resilience to
withstand domestic and external shocks with minimal adverse consequences for growth,
inflation and financial stability. A foundation has been laid, particularly in financial and
external sectors, for acceleration of the growth rate. Medium-term growth prospects for the
Indian economy would be contingent upon a number of factors including legislative changes,
fiscal empowerment, further reforms in the real sector, further liberalisation of the financial
sector and of the external sector, and, solving ‘overhang’ problems in various areas, such as,
cost recovery in the energy sector and management of foodgrains stocks while simultaneously
ensuring that such pressures do not continue in the future.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/229