Globalisation produces Good Outcomes, enhance them: Prof. Bhagwati
December 12, 2002
While underlining the premise that barring a few occasional downsides, globalisation
produces good outcomes, Prof. Bhagwati proposed that such outcomes be further improved.
Institutional response mechanisms should be designed to address any problems that may
arise in specific areas, complimentary policies should be used to enhance the good effects
and more caution and economic and political difficulties should be kept in mind while
carrying out economic reform.  This was the central message in Professor Jagdish
Bhagwati's lecture delivered here today. Prof. Bhagwati was delivering the Twelfth C.D.
Deshmukh Memorial Lecture instituted by the Reserve Bank of India in memory of its first
Indian Governor, the late Chintaman Dwarakanath Deshmukh.  Prof. Bhagwati is Professor,
Columbia University, New York, USA,
In his lecture today, Prof. Bhagwati addressed three major issues on the theme of
"Globalisation has a Human Face". These were: poverty in poor countries, child labour and
gender issues. He suggested that countries should do better in designing "appropriate
governance" so that the dominant effect or tendency of globalisation is good outcomes.
Illustrating the point, Prof. Bhagwati stated that if child labour gets reduced by prosperity
following globalisation, efforts should be made to use added policies to reduce it faster. He
also suggested that in order to enhance the good outcome effect of globalisation, countries
should put in place an institutional mechanism to address and remedy any wrong outcome
that may arise in specific areas. Countries have to be more cautious and mindful of
economic and political difficulties while making transition to globalisation, he stated and
added, "maximal speed of reform is not usally the optimal speed of reform."
Prof. Bhagwati pointed out that despite the criticism in the press voiced by anti-
globalisers, a recent international poll had suggested that the majority supported
globalisation. This majority was stronger in the developing countries than in the developed
countries, he added. Further, most anti-globalisers have used the unfortunate experience of
avoidable problems that had arisen from imprudent and hasty dismantling of capital account
controls to denounce other forms of globalisation. Financial liberalisation that created
serious problems such as the Asian financial crises, for instance, was used to condemn trade
liberalisation. In other words, anti-globalisers had created the illusion of political noise by
attacking all globalisation because some component of it was badly handled.
Anti-globalisers are also more concerned about social implications of economic
globalisation than its conventional economic efficacy. Questions, for instance, are raised
relating to areas, such as, the effects of globalisatiion on poverty in poor countries, the
working class in rich countries, especially their real incomes and labour standards which
they have achieved over decades of struggle, gender equality and women's welfare, mingling
of mainstream culture with indigenous culture and democratic governance in a world of
growing interdependence.
Prof. Bhagwati pointed out that the policy intervention and design will strongly
differ depending on which of the two contrasting theses one subscribed to. He stated that if
one believed that globalisation lacked a human face, one will want to restrain, challenge or
1handicap globalisation; whereas if one believed that globalisation had a human face, one
will complement, supplement and enhance the human face and policy interventions.
Alpana Kilawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-03/615
2