Report on Currency and Finance, 2000-01
January 14, 2002
Introduction
Against the backdrop of the current global deceleration and the diversity of the debate
generated abroad about the downturn, the Report on Currency and Finance for the year 2000-
01 addresses the theme of revitalising growth in India. An overview of macroeconomic
developments in the Indian economy during 2001-02 is followed by six chapters devoted to
the theme of the Report, an exploration of the slowdown, the role of fiscal policy in
reinvigorating growth, the conduct of monetary policy in the context of growth and inflation,
external levers of growth embodied in trade and capital flows and the allocative efficiency of
the financial system and the growth process. The final chapter summarises the report in the
form of a macroeconometric model of the Indian economy and tests for the growth response
of a panel of policy-induced stimuli to aggregate demand.
Real Sector
The findings in the Report suggest that the current phase of slowdown appears to
represent a loss of speed rather than a halt in growth. Cyclical patterns in activity are detected
but these are of limited duration and impact. The Indian economy is characterised by stable
and converging cycles which could be modulated with counter cyclical policies. The
impulses for growth can be generated and nurtured primarily by releasing the structural
constraints, which can shift the potential growth frontier outwards. So far, private
consumption has been providing the predominant stimulus to aggregate demand relative to
investment.  Discretionary fiscal stabilisers  mainly in the form of government consumption
have been holding up aggregate demand over the period of the downturn.   Capital formation
has been slowing down across all three sectors of the economy.  The size of accelerators
suggests that greater investment needs to be directed towards manufacturing so as to
revitalise growth. Manufacturing slowdown is reflecting as much a demand slack as a fall in
capacity utilisation and gaps in availability of infrastructure, particularly power. Structural
constraints to industrial growth are more dominant than cyclical variations. Productivity
changes and technological progress have been identified in the 1990s as important sources of
industrial growth.
Indian agriculture calls for reforms encompassing technology upgradation, creation of
infrastructure, creation of a better marketing system, revival of the rural credit delivery
system, and public sector capital formation in infrastructural facilities, particularly irrigation.
Abstracting from measurement issues, declining capital formation in agriculture has been a
matter of concern and the lack of capital a primary impediment to the adoption of new
technology. Given the overall resource constraint, a choice between subsidies and investment
is being imposed on the conduct of public policies for agriculture. Integration of Indian
agriculture with international markets would be necessary in the context of commitments to
WTO, complemented by well developed domestic futures markets for agricultural
commodities.
Cyclical variations in activity superimposed upon a persistent slowdown, under-
utilisation of capacity in various industries and the tightening of structural impediments have
combined to produce a drag on industrial growth. A higher level of output growth can be
sustained only by considerable improvement in the existing levels of infrastructure,
particularly telecommunication and power. Productivity growth is an important source of
growth and competitiveness, along with technological upgradation. FDI can be an important
conduit for technology transfer in India, although it currently operates only at the margin. Inthe case of public enterprises, productivity improvement would essentially require setting a
clear path for restructuring and privatisation. The institutional environment under which the
sector operates would require significant reforms. A conducive environment for industrial
growth hinges upon the rationalisation of labour legislations, changes in exit procedures
through appropriate legislation relating to industrial sickness, and modifications of the
Companies Act and industrial disputes and bankruptcy laws to impart necessary flexibility
and supply response in the labour market. These measures would reduce the implicit cost of
labour in production process.
The services sector has imparted resilience to the economy, particularly in times of
adverse agricultural shocks as also during cyclical downturns in industry. A notable feature of
the structural transformation of the services sector has been the growth of skill intensive and
high value added sectors.  As growth gathers momentum, the demand for these services is
expected to increase more than proportionately and this, in turn, would reinforce growth
itself.
Issues relating to regional growth have added a new dimension to the size and quality
of the growth process. In this context, it is necessary to emphasise the role of States in
improving the provision and quality of the two key infrastructural services which would
determine the sustainability of reforms: education and health. Involving the private sector in
the production and distribution of health and education services can have beneficial
externalities for the growth process.  Investing in these sectors will not only improve the
quality of human capital but can also become a source of higher productivity and growth.
Fiscal Policy
Fiscal deficits in India have been predominantly structural; the cyclical component
has been almost negligible, suggesting that discretionary policy has an important role to play
in cyclical swings.  The alternative of raising public sector capital expenditure in
manufacturing crowds out private investment. It is only the public sector capital expenditure
in infrastructure sectors that crowds in private investment. At the same time, the enlarged
fiscal deficit can financially crowd out private investment. There is, therefore, the need for a
restructuring of the composition of government expenditure to contain fiscal deficit for the
beneficial effect of government’s infrastructure investment to be realised.  The appropriate
degree of monetisation of fiscal deficits appears to be in the range of 20-25 per cent.
Monetary Policy
In recent years, there has been an upsurge of interest in the operational framework of
monetary policy. An operational model for monetary policy in India suggests that under
constrained discretion, monetary policy can be directed towards revitalising output growth in
the short-run. The long-run inflationary consequences of current monetary policy action,
however, need to be taken into account. Threshold inflation, i.e., growth-maximising inflation
rate is estimated at 5 per cent. There are potential output losses involved in further
disinflation. Sacrifice ratio estimates suggest that in a low-inflation environment, a one
percentage point reduction in inflation leads to a decline in output by 2 percentage points
below its potential.  The interest rate channel is rapidly emerging as the dominant
transmission mechanism, supported and reinforced by the credit channel.
External Sector
Capital flows have begun to play a significant role in India’s growth dynamics.
Evidence of strong complementarity with domestic investment suggests that capital flows
brighten the overall investment climate and stimulate domestic investment even when a part
of the capital flows actually gets absorbed in the form of accretions to reserves. Growth-augmenting role of foreign capital, however, seems to have been constrained by the low
levels of actual and planned absorption of foreign capital in India.
External payments imbalances of the past have largely resulted from overshooting the
sustainable level of current account deficit (CAD). A successful export-led growth strategy
alone can raise the sustainable limit of external resource gap for India. Despite the presence
of strong evidence of complementarity with domestic investment, the extent of dependence
on external financing cannot be raised significantly without endangering the risk of payments
difficulties.  While supplementing domestic saving with foreign capital, a somewhat higher
level of sustainable level of CAD may appear feasible only if it is concurrently possible to
augment the absorptive capacity and export performance of the economy.
Financial System
In India, financial intermediaries, dominated by the banking system, have historically
played an important role and correspondingly limited the role of the financial markets.  The
present context of financial liberalisation has underlined the need for a diversified and
balanced financial system, where both financial institutions and financial markets play
important roles.  Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which have historically provided
risk capital, have, of late, started diversifying into other financial activities, such as extending
short-term loans/working capital finance. Huge long-term investments required for financing
the infrastructure sector can be provided only by the developed capital markets, especially by
the long-term debt market. Empirical research suggests that improvement in the functioning
of the stock markets leads to higher debt-equity ratio in firms.  It also stimulates greater use
of bank finance. Further, stock markets and banks are not substitute sources of corporate
finance and stock market developments actually tend to increase the quantity of bank loans.
On balance, it is desirable to have a diversified and balanced financial system where both
financial intermediaries and financial markets play important roles imparting greater
competitiveness and efficiency to the financial system. This co-existence is socially desirable
as it not only encourages competition, but also reduces transaction costs within the financial
system, and helps to improve resource allocation within the economy.
Macroeconomic Summary
The macroeconomic model presented in the Report provides a synoptic view of an
economy experiencing an adjustment of demand to the supply constraints. Aggregate demand
is sensitive to interventions by stabilisation policies; however, these stimuli are short-lived,
and unable to retain potency in the absence of an upward shift in the aggregate supply curve.
Fiscal stimuli in support of revival must rely on a compositional shift in fiscal expenditures in
favour of public investment in infrastructure without an unbridled expansion of the fiscal
deficit. A stimulus to aggregate demand can also be applied via expansionary monetary
policy through its influence on real interest rates. The inflation consequences of expansionary
monetary policy set up a constraint for contra-cyclical monetary policy in India.
Concluding Observations
The Report is exploratory and its findings formative, requiring the validation of time.
Identification of factors underlying the current deceleration is an empirical quest.
Quantification matters from the point of view of calibrating the policy response. Revitalising
growth has assumed a global urgency; the scope for discretion in national efforts is getting
bounded by the inertial dynamics of the slowdown. For India, a measure of insulation from
global conditions provides some discretion to seek within for country-specific solutions. In
this regard, the principal impediment emerges as the inadequate response of privateinvestment to the change in the development strategy. Catalyzing private investment could be
the central focus of the second generation of reforms. This may require transformation in the
policy framework, including a reconsideration of the public and private incentive structure to
spur and modulate the flow of investment demand. Consumption levels form the bedrock of
aggregate demand in India. Here external flows have a role to play in smoothing
consumption, and preventing the deceleration in the rate of domestic saving and investment.
This, in turn, has implications for external viability. The key role of exports comes to the
fore. The financial sector can contribute to the revival in a supply-leading role as well as by
improving the overall productivity of the economy through allocative efficiency gains. The
financial sector, comprising financial institutions and markets, may well nurture the first
impulses heralding the upturn.
The urgency attached in this Report to the revitalisation of growth is enmeshed in a
recognition of the basic impediments to sustaining high growth - the high incidence of
unemployment and the lack of tangible gains in poverty reduction.  There is a growing
consensus in the country for a bold agenda of reforms which directly address these
fundamental obstacles to progress.  Creating an environment for investing in human and
physical capital, labour market and industrial reforms, removal of pricing distortions, farm
policy re-orientation, legal restructuring and fiscal empowerment by rebalancing fiscal
instruments will help to address the gaps in employment generation and poverty alleviation.
The translation of this agenda into action would be facilitated by a favourable macro-
economic environment as an initial condition.
Alpana Killawala
 General Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/799