RBI operationalises Guidelines for
Two-Way Fungibility of ADRs/GDRs
February 13, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India today operationalised the guidelines for the limited
two-way fungibility of ADRs/GDRs as approved by Government of India.  The operative
guidelines for the limited two-way fungibility have been issued under the "Issue of
Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds and Ordinary Shares (through Depository Receipt
Mechanism) Scheme, 1993. The enabling guidelines were announced under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act (FEMA) on March 2, 2001. With the issuing of the
operational guidelines, the two-way fungibility of ADRs/GDRs has now become
operational.
Under the guidelines, re-issuance of ADRs/GDRs would be permitted to the
extent of ADRs/GDRs that have been redeemed and the underlying shares are sold in the
domestic market.  No specific permission of the Reserve Bank will be required for re-
conversion. The re-conversion of shares into ADRs/GDRs under this scheme will be
distinct from portfolio investment by Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs). The
transactions will be demand driven and as such would not require company involvement
or fresh permissions. The custodian will monitor the re-issuance of ADRs/GDRs within
the sectoral cap fixed by the Government of India.  Further, each purchase transaction
will be only against delivery and payment received in foreign exchange through banking
channels.
Brokers registered with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) would
act as intermediaries in the two-way fungibility of ADRs/GDRs. The Reserve Bank has
already given the general permission to brokers to buy shares on behalf of overseas
investors through its notification dated March 2, 2001.  As secondary market
transactions, the acquisition of shares on behalf of the overseas investors through the
intermediary would fall within the regulatory purview of SEBI. Since the demand for re-
conversion of shares into ADRs/GDRs would be from overseas investors and not the
company, the expenses involved in the transaction would be borne by the investor.  These
transactions will be governed by the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The detailed operative guidelines can be accessed on the RBI website at
www.rbi.org.in or on FEMA page at www.fema.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/912