Government offers 15 year stock for auction:
Stock also offered for non-competitive bidding
January 7, 2002
The Government of India has announced a sale by auction of a new 15 year
Government of India stock for Rs.5,000 crore (nominal).  The auction will be held on
Monday, January 14, 2002 by the Reserve Bank of India in Mumbai.  The auction will be
yield based.
The Government has also offered this stock upto 5 per cent, i.e., Rs.250 crore, of
the notified amount of the sale for non-competitive bidding to eligible institutions and
individuals.  It may be recalled that the Government had recently announced a scheme of
non-competitive bidding facility in the auction of Government securities to encourage
retail participation. Individuals, hindu undivided family and institutions such as provident
funds, trusts, universities, non-profit organistions, regional rural banks, urban cooperative
banks, non-banking financial companies, corporates are eligible to bid under the non-
competitive bidding scheme facility provided bids are of a minimum amount of
Rs.10,000 and a maximum amount of Rs.1 crore and can be put through any bank or a
primary dealer offering the scheme.  Only one bid per entity will be allowed. The
Reserve Bank of India will make firm allotment to individual bidders upto Rs.250 crore
of the stock. Non-competitive bidders will get the allotment at the weighted average
cutoff yield arrived at in the auction.  Details of non-competitive scheme can be accessed
from the RBI website through a special URL www.ncgsecs.rbi.org.in
Competitive bids in the prescribed form obtainable from the Regional Director,
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai Office (Public Debt Office), Fort, Mumbai should be
submitted as per the normal practice to Mumbai office on January 14, 2002 during
banking hours.  On the basis of bids received, the Reserve Bank of India will determine
the maximum rate of yield at which offers will be accepted. The results of the auction
will be during banking hours on January 15, 2002. The new stock will qualify for the
Ready Forward facility.
Bids for underwriting the issue of Government security under auction can be
submitted by the 'Primary Dealers in the Government Securities Market' up to 12.30 p.m.
on January 12, 2002 to the Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Internal Debt Management
Cell, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Fort, Mumbai 400 001.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/774