RBI issues Consolidated Guidelines on
Foreign Direct Investment in Banks
The Reserve Bank of India today issued consolidated guidelines on foreign direct
investments in the banking sector.  The consolidated guidelines incorporate the prevailing
Government of India policy on foreign direct investment in the banking sector and various
statutory provisions and regulatory guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India from time to
time. The consolidated guidelines are available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in)
Some points of the consolidated guidelines are highlighted here:
(a) In terms of Government of India guidelines issued in May 2001, foreign direct investments
from all sources in private banks are permitted under the automatic route upto 49 per cent.
Foreign direct investment in public sector banks, including State Bank of India, however, are
permitted upto 20 per cent.
(b) The maximum limit of 49 per cent will also apply to foreign banks having branch presence in
India and wishing to make foreign direct investment in private banks.
(c) As before, transfer of shares of 5 per cent and more of the paid up capital in private banks
must require RBI acknowledgement.
(d)  As per provisions contained in various statutes, the maximum voting rights per shareholder
will be 10 per cent of the total voting rights for private banks. In respect of nationalised
banks, as per statutory provisions, the maximum voting rights per shareholder (outside of
Government) are also restricted to one per cent of the total voting rights. So far as SBI is
concerned, the maximum voting rights per shareholder (other than RBI) is 10 per cent of the
issued capital.
(e) It is clarified that in view of government policy or applicable statutory provisions, certain
categories of foreign investments cannot take the automatic route but have to invest with
prior approval from specified authorities. These categories include: (i) investors who have
financial or technical collaboration in the same or allied field; (ii) transfer of existing shares
in a banking company from residents to non-residents; and (iii) foreign investments in banks
which have joint venture/subsidiary in insurance sector.
(f) It is also clarified that banks are expected to conform to guidelines already in place in regard
to reporting and other requirements of the Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange
Board of India and the Companies Act.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/926