RBI Governor for greater Productivity and Efficiency in Indian banks
December 28, 2002
“We need greater productivity and efficiency to achieve the targets we set for
ourselves, whether it be the macro-economic target of achieving 8 per cent growth in the
Tenth Plan period or making our banking system strong and efficient and on par with
international banks”, this was the central message of the inaugural address of Dr. Bimal
Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the twenty-fourth Bank Economists’
Conference. The Conference was held between December 27 and 29 in Bangalore.
Plan target not difficult to achieve
Referring to the targets set by the Tenth Plan of 8 per cent growth, poverty
alleviation and improvement in human development indicator and the cynicism expressed
about their achievement, Dr. Jalan unequivocally said, “I believe that the overall macro-
economic situation has seldom been better in achieving the targets set by the Tenth Plan.
The conditions cannot be more appropriate to meet the challenges in both the banking
and the real sectors.”
Contending that the growth target of 8 per cent envisaged by the Tenth Plan
document was not at all difficult to achieve, the Governor pointed out that India had
never faced a more favourable situation than it was at present. The Governor said that the
conditions were right despite many adverse external factors. The inflation was low, for
instance, despite the most severe drought in the country; India’s foreign exchange
reserves were at the highest and healthiest level despite a hike in the oil prices, border
tensions, global slowdown and tensions prevailing on the Iraq front. In fact, the reserves
were also healthy as they were not built up by increasing external debt, he pointed out.
The Indian economy was also nudging towards 5-5.5 per cent growth despite lower
agriculture production, slow industrial recovery and a global downturn.  There was
abundance of liquidity and the interest rates at long and short maturities were the lowest
ever despite a high fiscal deficit and a high borrowing requirement of the government. In
other words, if domestic and external resources could be a constraint in achieving growth
targets, India faced none and therefore the environment was most conducive for growth,
he pointed out.
To underscore the positive factors, the Governor recalled the earlier times when
the presence of any of the constraints, such as, drought or higher oil prices, would have
caused India to face tight liquidity, higher interest rates, high fiscal deficit, scarce foreign
exchange and higher exchange controls. “But today we face none of these and there is no
difference of opinion that we are in the best possible situation to achieve the targeted
growth”, he stated unequivocally.
Increase productivity and reduce costsThe answer to the cynicism despite many favourable conditions lied in low
productivity, the Governor said and added that  “For every rupee of capital spent by the
government or by the private sector, we produce less,“ he stated. He lamented that
inefficiency in the use of resources, tolerance of waste and slothfulness contributed to
low productivity. “Our savings rate is the highest but our rate of growth is low. Our cost
of doing business is relatively high and returns are not commensurate with investments
made"  the Governor said and added that this was true also of the banking sector which
suffers from high cost and low productivity as reflected in high spreads. The important
challenge of managing transformation would, for the banking sector, mean moving from
high cost, low productivity and high spread to being more efficient, productive and
competitive. For this, the banks need to address four main areas viz., corporate
governance, efficiency, technology upgradation and HRD.  Of these, HRD is the more
difficult area to tackle. In public sector institutions, there are more challenges to face.
"Taking examination to get into the system is the biggest challenge but once you get in
there is no challenge" he observed. Increasing productivity and lowering cost per unit of
output were the two biggest challenges faced by India, more specifically the banking and
the financial system.
Keep depositors' trust
In addition to low productivity, the Governor dwelt upon the other two issues,
namely prudential norms and supervision and regulation. He commended the progress
made by India’s banking and financial system in prudential norms and added that India
was contributing at the conceptual level in the international forum and was in fact the
chairperson of the committee contributing to the thinking on adoption of BASEL II
norms in emerging economies. Apart from these, India had also made significant progress
on transparency, capital adequacy and disclosures.  While the achievements were
significant, India lagged behind in management of non-performing assets.
He stated that there were two reasons why the banking system should follow
international norms. One, concern for depositors’ money and second to face international
competition.
The Governor pointed out that banking was the only institution that invested other
people’s money. On capital of 10 rupees they can lend 100 rupees. Bankers must be
conscious of this and follow prudential norms of the highest order so that the public
money is not threatened. “Banking system’s edifice is based on trust, and that should not
be eroded” he stressed. At the international level, the non-adherence to globally accepted
prudential norms would result in the international system doubting the repaying capacity
of the Indian banks and make them uncompetitive in the international market. The
Governor pointed out that no international forum would grudge the time table a country
sets out to achieve the global standards.  He added that India was fruitfully participating
in all international discussions on these issues and was evolving a framework for
consultative process among the emerging economy.Need for greater accountability
The Governor further stated that there are two different trends in area of
supervision and regulation. Both, greater stress on supervision and regulation of the
banking system and deregulation of financial markets with openness and transparency
existed side by side.  He also said that two economic factors were special to banking and
financial system. Unlike real sector, the impact of failure in a bank or financial unit has a
more pervading effect. When an externality affects a banking unit, the depositors,
borrowers and markets feel the impact immediately. Secondly, when something goes
wrong, the only way to handle this is to take prompt corrective action. Deterioration in a
bank or a financial unit does not have a linear course but has multiplying effect. This
exponential effect is not seen in the real sector.
This situation can be tackled only by taking prompt corrective action. He said that
in India, however, action is often postponed in the name of "doing good". Regulation is
weak in some part of bank sector and prompt corrective action lukewarm. This needs to
be corrected by strengthening the legal framework and removing multiple levels of
control and specifying a clear-cut supervisory authority. Depoliticisation of bank and
bank's accountability of the depositors should be clearly emphasised.
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2002-03/676