Handbook of Instructions - Basic Statistical Returns 1 and 2 -
Sixth Edition, March 2002
April 15, 2002
The Handbook of Instructions, Basic Statistical Returns 1 and 2, Sixth Edition,
March 2002 is now available. The Department of Statistical Analysis and Computer
Services of the Reserve Bank of India brings out this Handbook whenever there is a
major revision in the BSR-1&2 Information System. This edition is the sixth revised and
enlarged edition. Apart from the detailed instructions for filling in the BSR-1A, BSR-1B
and BSR-2 returns it also contains the list of revised codes to be used for classification of
borrowal accounts. A relationship table between BSR-1A occupation codes and BSR-1B
item codes is also provided for easier compilation. This revised scheme will be effective
March 2002 round of survey, the reference date of the year being March 31. In order to
facilitate the correct reporting of the data in BSR-1A and - 1B correctly, some examples
illustrating the method of classification of credit limit and outstanding credit in BSR-1
are also given in this Handbook. In addition to BSR-1 and BSR-2, particulars regarding
other Basic Statistical Returns to be submitted to the Reserve Bank of India have also
been indicated in the Annexure to this Handbook.
The inland price of the handbook is Rs.35 (inclusive of postage).
The copies of the Handbook are available in the Sales Section (DRRP), Ground
Floor, Amar Building, P. M. Road, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Fort, Mumbai 400 001. Order for purchase can be placed with the
Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, City Ice Building, 2nd Floor, Perin Nariman
Street, Fort, Mumbai 400001 on payment through DD/Cheque/Pay Order drawn in favour
of the Reserve Bank of India, payable at Mumbai only. The publication is also available
at the Reserve Bank's Website on the Internet at URL: www.rbi.org.in
Ajit Prasad
Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/1152