Indian Promoters' can hold 49 per cent in Private Banks
June 7, 2002
In order to provide a level playing field, it has been decided to raise the maximum
limit of shareholding of Indian promoters in private sector banks from 40 per cent to 49
per cent of their paid up capital.
In terms of the revised guidelines for entry of new private sector banks issued on
January 3,  2001  promoters’ contribution for setting up a new bank  was restricted to 40
per cent of the paid up capital of the bank at any point of time.  In case the initial
contribution to capital was in excess of the  minimum proportion of 40 per cent,
promoters were required to dilute their excess stake after one year of the bank’s
operation. Promoters’ contribution included the equity of the Indian shareholder and
foreign co-promoter, if any. In the case of new private sector banks established under the
earlier guidelines issued on January 22, 1993, the licensing conditions  prescribed by the
Reserve Bank of India stipulated that the promoters’ equity should be brought down to 40
per cent of the paid up capital of the bank within a stipulated period.
Further, the Reserve Bank of India had, in February 2002, clarified that Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) upto 49 per cent from all sources would be permitted in private
sector bank under the automatic route subject to the conformity with the guidelines issued
from time to time. Consequently, FDI through strategic investment or private placement
in a private sector bank could go up to 49 per cent of the bank’s equity. This would be
higher than the limit of 40 per cent prescribed for promoters leading to an anomalous
situation vis-a-vis equity holding of Indian promoters.
The position was, therefore, re-examined in consultation with Government of
India and the maximum limit of shareholding of Indian promoters in private sector banks
has now been raised to 49 per cent of their paid up capital in order to provide a level
playing field. The other licensing conditions for entry of new banks and those stipulated
for FDI will remain the same.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/1353