RBI issues Draft Directions/Guidelines
for Securitisation/Reconstruction Companies
The Reserve Bank of India today issued draft directions/guidelines to for
securitisation/reconstruction companies. The draft directions/guidelines along with the draft
application forms for securitisation/reconstruction companies have been placed on the RBI
website (www.rbi.org.in) for public comments.
It may be recalled that the Government of India promulgated The Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Ordinance, 2002.
The Ordinance came into effect from June 21, 2002. The Ordinance has subsequently also
been passed by both the houses of the Parliament and now awaits Presidential assent.
The Reserve Bank of India's role with regard to the Ordinance is to grant certificate of
registration to existing as well as new securitisation/reconstruction companies for carrying on
or commencing the business of securitisation or asset reconstruction and suggesting
conditions and eligibility criteria. The Reserve Bank is also empowered to frame guidelines
to enable such companies to take necessary measures for the purpose of asset reconstruction,
viz., management of the business of a borrower, sale / lease of a business of a borrower,
rescheduling of debt repayment, enforcement of security, settlement of dues, taking
possession of secured assets, etc. The Reserve Bank is also empowered to prescribe
appropriate prudential norms relating to income recognition, accounting standards,
provisioning, capital adequacy and deployment of funds for such companies. The Reserve
Bank has also been empowered under the Ordinance to issue directions either generally or to
a particular class of companies or to a company or companies regarding deployment of funds,
acquisition of any type of financial assets, their valuation and aggregate value of financial
assets that can be acquired.
To consider these issues, the Reserve Bank had constituted two working groups to
examine these issues. After detailed deliberation and study, the groups made several
recommendations for effective working of securitisation companies/reconstruction
companies.  Based on the recommendations of the working groups, the Reserve Bank
proposes to shortly issue directions and guidelines.
The Reserve Bank has placed the drafts under the following heads :
• proposed format of the application for Certificate of Registration;
• The Securitisation Companies/ Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions,
2002; and
• The Securitisation Companies/ Reconstruction Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve
Bank) Directions, 2002.
• General guidelines for securitisation companies/reconstruction companies
The Reserve Bank has invited the views and comments on the directions/guidelines
from the general public, banks and financial institutions within 10 days.  Views and
comments may be sent to dnbs@rbi.org.in or by post to:
The Chief General Manager-in-Charge,
Department of Non-Banking Supervision, Central Office
Reserve Bank of India2
nd
Centre1, B Wing, 2 Floor, World Trade Centre,
Mumbai 400 005.
 Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release 2002-2003/632