Conference of State Finance Secretaries
June 8, 2002
Harmonious relationship between the central government and the state
governments in management of finances is crucial in maintaining integrity of financial
systems and financial stability particularly at a time when capital flows somewhat freely
across borders. This was the central message given by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India at the bi-annual conference of state finance secretaries held here
yesterday. Finance secretaries of   24  states participated. Shri C S Rao, Secretary
(Expenditure), Government of India, Ministry of Finance and Smt. Usha Sahajpal,
Comptroller General of Accounts represented the Centre. Dr. Y V Reddy chaired the
conference.
The Reserve Bank of India has been hosting biannual conferences for state
finance secretaries since 1997. The conference has, over the years, institutionalised a
forum where issues relating to state finances are discussed in the presence of the finance
secretaries of all the states,  representatives of centre, Planning Commission, Comptroller
and Auditor General of Accounts, Comptroller General of Accounts and the Reserve
Bank of India. The focus of these meetings is to discuss common issues concerning all
these agencies and move towards the common goal of achieving financial stability.
Several issues such as guarantees, ways and means advances, market borrowings,
reducing interest burden of states, voluntary disclosure in public accounts and customer
service between the Reserve Bank and the governments have been discussed at these
conferences with a view to finding solutions which are in collective interest of the nation
as a whole.
Expressing concern at the fiscal situation of the states, the Governor  highlighted
some of the current issues in state finances that need attention. These mainly relate to
areas such as market borrowings by the states, guarantees given by them to various public
sector undertakings under their fold as also borrowings by the state level undertakings
themselves. He  urged the forum to apply its collective mind to focussing on related
issues to enhance fiscal sustainability in national interest. The Governor stated that given
the rigidities in expenditure management, there was also a need to concentrate on the
asset side where governments have already built tremendous assets, in the form of public
sector undertakings and services  provided by them. The Governor also urged restraint in
the use of the ways and means advances or overdrafts from the Reserve Bank by states.
He recalled the various innovative methods used by the Reserve Bank as debt manager to
facilitate market borrowing by states through direct access to  market through the auction
route and tap issues. There was perhaps a need for looking at other options also, he
added. Stressing on the cooperative framework between the centre and the states, the
Governor pointed out that there are lessons to be learnt from the coordinating approach
adopted by large federal governments, such as, the European Union, China and the
United States in managing their finances successfully. He noted the harmonious relations
between all the agencies involved in management of finances in India so far and
underscored the importance of problem solving in an coordinated manner.The other issues discussed at the conference included coordinated approach for
controlling committed payments such as salaries, pensions and interest payments, more
flexibility in managing resources and their deployment, restructuring of loans given by
central government to states at higher rates, reviewing funding through centrally
sponsored schemes, negotiated loans, provision of efficient services by banks for
government transactions.
 The conference finalised the Report of the Group of Finance Secretaries on Fiscal
Risk of Guarantees. The Report will be placed in public domain in due course.
Presentations were also made by CRISIL, CARE and ICRA on ratings of state
government guarantees. The finance secretaries also adopted for implementation the
Report of the Working Group on Accounting and Reconciliation Procedure - State
Government transactions. The draft report of the Group on Interest Burden of States was
also discussed. Finally, taking into consideration, responses received from state
governments, the format for reporting finances of local bodies was proposed to be
finalised by Comptroller & Auditor General.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/1354