Negotiated Dealing System - Trade Data on RBI Website
 October 24, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has decided to disseminate the data on trades in
Government Securities and other data captured by the Negotiated Dealing System (NDS)
through its website. The information could, from October 25, 2002 be accessed either
from the home page of RBI’s main website (www.rbi.org.in) or through a special URL
(www.nds.rbi.org.in). The move is for wider access of the data and transparency in the
Government Securities market. The data on transactions in government securities settled
daily at PDO, Mumbai is already published on website and can be downloaded from
website.
The NDS pages available to public on the website include:
• Trade Watch: The main page called Trade Watch displays data on ten latest
trades concluded/ reported on NDS after they are confirmed by both dealers. It
provides hyperlinks to see trades in a particular security/instrument and also has a
button for viewing all trades done during the day. Since the number of daily
trades exceeds 1000, all trades can be viewed with the help of filters provided on
the page. Filters operate on maturity of security and/or time of the day. For
instance, all trades done between 10 am and 11 am in 7.26% 2013 security can be
viewed at a time. The order of record display is decided by the time buyer
confirms the trade.
• Market Watch: This page displays ten latest trades with details on items, such as,
settlement type (T+0), day’s traded volume, previous day’s trade volume, day’s
and week’s high/low yields, best bid/offer price from quotes. The page also has a
button to view all trades.
• Quote Watch: This page displays the ten latest quotes in various securities
available on the NDS. The quotes can be viewed for a particular security of
Central Government/State Government. A Central Government security can be
selected on the basis of its year of maturity, and a State Government security can
be selected by selecting the state. An option to view all quotes is also available.
• Call & Repo: An option is also provided to view ten latest trades in call money
and repo. This page can also be accessed from the trade watch page by clicking on
instrument/security called call/repo.
Facilities: All the pages provide links to go directly from one page to another.
They also provide facility to select and view trades in particular Government Securities
or treasury bills and to view trades in call or repo. Facilities to plot charts on the basis of
prices and yields and to print the pages have been also provided on all the pages.
Market participants are encouraged to send suggestions, if any, for further
improvements in the pages to alpanakillawala@rbi.org.in or helpprd@rbi.org.in.Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-2003/429