Basic Statistical Returns
of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India
Volume - 30, March 2001
March 18, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India has today informed that the Basic Statistical Returns
of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India - Volume 30, March 2001 is now available for
sale.  The Department of Statistical Analysis and Computer Services of Reserve Bank of
India brings out this publication annually.  The Volume, thirtieth in the series, presents
comprehensive data on number of offices, employees, deposits and credit based on Basic
Statistical Returns in respect of the offices of the scheduled commercial banks in India as
at the end of March 2001.  The Volume is divided into five different sections
disseminating credit and deposit data of scheduled commercial banks with reference to
various classificatory characteristics.  Section 1 presents general information on
commercial banking as also the summary data on deposits and credit at all-India and state
level.  Section 2 gives state/district-wise distribution of deposits and outstanding credit
classified according to population groups and bank groups.  Data on deposits by type of
deposits is presented in Section 3.  Classification of outstanding credit according to
different categories such as size of credit limit, rate of interest, type of organisation, type
of account, bank group, state and population group, etc., are given in Section 4.  In
Section 5, these are further classified according to occupation of borrower.  District and
occupation-wise distribution of outstanding credit is also given in the final section.
The inland price of this Report is Rs.220/- (inclusive of postage) and for overseas
buyers the price is US$70 (inclusive of airmail charges).
The copies of the publication are available in the Sales Section (DRRP), Ground
floor, Amar Building, P.M. Road, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001.  Order for purchase can be placed with the
Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, City Ice Building, 2nd Floor, Perin Nariman
Street, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001 on payment through D.D./Cheque/Pay Order drawn in
favour of Reserve Bank of India, payable at Mumbai only.  The publication is also
available at the Reserve Bank's Website on the Internet at URL: www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/1041