RBI Deputy Governor emphasises the need for
Strong Corporate Governance in Cooperative Banks
July 5, 2002
It was for the cooperative banks themselves to build on the synergy inherent in the
co-operative structure and stand up for their unique qualities. With elements of good
corporate governance, sound investment policy, appropriate internal control systems,
better credit risk management, focus on newly-emerging business areas like micro
finance, commitment to better customer service, adequate mechanisation and proactive
policies on house-keeping issues, co-operative banks will definitely be able to grapple
with these challenges and convert them into opportunities. This was stated by Shri Vepa
Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, in his inaugural address at the
National convention of Urban cooperative Banks in Mumbai. The Convention was
organised by Academy of Corporate Governance, Hyderabad supported by
Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad.
Dwelling on the background of cooperative structure and the relevance of
corporate governance for these institutions, the Deputy Governor said that co-operative
corporate governance is about ensuring co-operative relevance and performance by
connecting members, management and the employees to the policy, strategy and
decision-making processes.
Stating that regulators are external pressure points for good corporate governance
the Deputy Governor pointed out that mere complying with regulatory pressures was only
a minimum requirement of good corporate governance.  He added that to reach higher
than minimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies additional pressures from
within the organisation, peers and market were required.
The Deputy Governor stated that the Reserve Bank sees transparency and
disclosure as an important adjunct to the supervisory process as they facilitate market
discipline of banks. According to him, deregulation and operational freedom must go
hand in hand with operational transparency. Transparency has been emphasised by
expanding the coverage of information and timeliness of such information and its
analytical content. The issue before the RBI in this regard is how to suitably adapt
disclosures standards made applicable to commercial banks for co-operative banks. The
co-operative banks have also been put under the prudential norms regime to bring about
the desirable level of transparency in their balance sheets.
The Deputy Governor further pointed out that the RBI had advised Registrars of
Co-operative Societies of the State Governments in 1996 that the balance sheet and profit
and loss account should be prepared based on prudential norms and that the
statutory/departmental auditors of co-operative banks should look into the compliance
with these norms. He expected auditors to be well-versed with all aspects of the new
guidelines issued by RBI and ensure that the profit and loss account and balance sheet of
co-operative banks are prepared in a transparent manner and reflect the true state of
affairs. Auditors should also ensure that other necessary statutory provisions and
appropriations out of profits were made as required in terms of Co-operative Societies
Act/ Rules of the state concerned and the bye-laws of the respective institutions.Stating that it was necessary for co-operative banks to devote adequate attention
to maximizing their returns on every unit of resources through an effective funds
management strategy and mechanism, the Deputy Governor pointed out that appropriate
internal control systems need to be strengthened at all levels in co-operative credit
institutions. The Deputy Governor mentioned that the RBI had issued comprehensive
guidelines for transactions in securities to all co-operative banks - both urban and rural -
as early as in September 1992. These guidelines enforced certain discipline in
government securities transactions and minimised settlement risks. Banks were also
advised that only brokers registered with NSE or BSE or OTCEI should be utilised for
acting as intermediary and to have proper internal control measures for monitoring the
transactions in government securities.
The Deputy Governor, however, emphasised that regulatory policy can only set
the broad contours of an appropriate investment strategy. It is no guarantee for
articulation and implementation of commercially sound investment decisions by lending
institution(s). Supervision is only periodic and, therefore, cannot be a substitute for
effective and continuous internal control backed by an independent and efficacious audit
system, he explained and added that it is imperative to have in place audit committees of
the board independent of the management in co-operative banks for effective and
continuous internal control.
Referring to the important issue of duality of control over co-operative banks, the
Deputy Governor informed that the need for a separate regulatory agency for the co-
operative banks was being debated in various quarters.
Regarding power and decision-making in co-operative banks, he said that both are
too often concentrated at the top in too few hands. Co-operative performance has
therefore been for a long time characterized by lack of participation and sense of
involvement. He urged that the State Governments refashioned management in co-
operative banks by picking up threads of good corporate governance. Further, the absence
of a proper system of placement and skill upgradation inputs constrain professional
management in co-operative banks. It is necessary to keep the staff sufficiently motivated
through periodic job rotation, job enrichment and recognition of performance. The co-
operative banks should indeed work like professional organizations on sound managerial
systems in tune with the needs of the time taking care of future projections of
requirements to retain and improve their market share and identity in the long run. It is in
this context that professionalism and accountability of the banks’ boards assume such
critical significance. He also touched upon improving the skillsets of state cooperative
departments and internal auditors to spot problems expeditiously and to bring them to the
management's notice.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2002-2003/23