RBI releases Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy:2001
January 8, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India has released the fourth volume of its annual publication
‘Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy:2001'. The Reserve Bank has been providing
time series data on major macroeconomic and financial statistics for the Indian economy
through this publication.
The volume contains 218 statistical tables covering data on national income
aggregates, output, prices, money, banking, financial markets, public finances, trade and
balance of payments. Eight new tables have been added this year that provide information on
direct finance to farmers according to size of land-holdings, combined deficits of central and
state governments, quarterly estimates of GDP, month-wise GFD of central government and
repo/reverse repos. Annual data are generally provided for the period 1970-2001, though
efforts have been made to provide longer time series, where possible. For quarterly/monthly
and for higher frequency data the time period coverage is comparatively shorter.
The publication is a useful storehouse of statistical information at one place that can
be readily accessed by researchers, analysts and other users interested in data on the Indian
economy. The Handbook can be viewed as a knowledge tool and one of the several steps
taken by the Reserve Bank for improving data dissemination.
The Handbook is available in printed form as well as in CD-Rom format. The CD-
Rom incorporates intelligent search features that allow for searches across tables, enabling
the user to select one or more of any data series for any selected time-period from any table
in the Handbook in a user-friendly manner. The Handbook contains data on about 4,750
variables/data series and provide an efficient and cost-effective solution to data storage and
retrieval. The Handbook is also placed on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in).
The publication in its print and CD-Rom form is available for sale at the Sales
Section, Reserve Bank of India, Ground Floor, Amar Building, P.M. Road, Fort, Mumbai –
400 001. The inland price of the print version of the Handbook is Rs.250 with a concessional
price of Rs.200 for public libraries and educational institutions. The price for the overseas
buyers is US$ 70. The CD-Rom can be obtained for an inland price of Rs.300 (inclusive of
postage) or Rs. 200 as concessional price. The price for the overseas buyer is fixed at US$
60. All prices are inclusive of postage.
Orders for the purchase can be placed with the Director, Division of Reports,
Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic Analysis & Policy, Reserve Bank of
nd
India, City Ice Building, 2 Floor, Perin Nariman Street, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001 on
payment through demand draft or cheque drawn in favour of the Reserve Bank of India and
payable at Mumbai only.
Alpana Killawala
General ManagerPress Release No. 2001-2002/ 776