Report of the Standing Committee on
International Financial Standards and Codes
June 7, 2002
It may be recalled that the Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and
Codes was constituted in December 1999 under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India with the Secretary, Economic Affairs, Government of India
as Alternate Chairman in order to facilitate positioning of international financial standards
and codes in relevant areas of the financial system in India and to guide the overall process of
implementation of appropriate changes in respect of various segments of the financial system.
The Standing Committee Chairman (Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI) and Alternate
Chairman (Shri C.M. Vasudev, Secretary, Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance,
Government of India) have now submitted the Report of the Committee to Dr. Bimal Jalan,
Governor of the Reserve Bank. The Report of the Standing Committee includes a synthesis
report by Dr. T.C.A. Anant, Professor, Delhi School of Economics on the reports of the ten
advisory groups and a technical group constituted by it.
The Standing Committee held that implementation of advisory/ technical groups’ reports in
relevant sectors would require a co-ordinated approach based on elements of consensus,
incentives, technical support, resources and encouragement to concerned institutions and
regulatory bodies.
The Standing Committee as per its objectives has to sensitise the authorities and markets by
benchmarking Indian market practices with international standards and codes. In order to
enable continuation of this process, the Committee proposed certain actions including wide
publicity of reports, introduction of a system of monitoring the progress of implementing the
recommendations of the advisory/technical groups and endorsed the views of the synthesis
report on institutional arrangements.
In accordance with the decision taken by the Committee, it has been decided to make the
Standing Committee Report available to the public for wider dissemination. Accordingly, the
full text of the Report of the Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and
Codes has been placed on the Reserve Bank website www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/1349