RBI's Substantial Relaxations for Forex Markets
December 21, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India has allowed banks to offer foreign currency-rupee swaps to their customers
without any limit and exporters/importers to book forward contracts upto USD 100 million without
documentary evidence as also freely rebook cancelled contracts. The Reserve Bank has also granted
general permission to banks to offer hedging facility to foreign direct investments. Moreover, banks will
be able to freely invest in overseas money and debt market instruments. Foreign banks will not be
required to spread their requirement of hedging their Tier I capital over six months.  The Reserve Bank
has made these relaxations as a part of the ongoing liberalisation of exchange control regulations and
taking into account the stable market conditions and healthy foreign exchange inflows.
The details of regulations relaxed are:
(1) Foreign currency–rupee swaps
It has been decided to permit banks to offer foreign currency-rupee swaps without any limits in
order to facilitate customers to hedge their foreign currency liabilities.
Earlier, banks were permitted to access the market up to USD 50 million only while offering this
product to customers.
(2) Booking of forward contracts based on past performance
Exporters/importers are now permitted to book forward contracts up to the extent of  average  of
past  three  years  export/import  turnover,  without  production  of  documents evidencing
exports/imports, subject to the condition that at any point of time, the outstanding contracts shall
not exceed 25 percent of eligible limit, subject to a cap of USD 100 million.
Earlier such forward contracts outstanding could not exceed USD 50 million.
(3) Cancellations and rebooking of forward contracts
Corporates now have full freedom to rebook cancelled contracts relating to exposures falling due
with in one year without any limit. For availing of this facility, entities are required to furnish
details of unhedged exposure to the banks.
Earlier, this facility was available subject to a cap of USD 100 million per financial year.
(4) Forward cover for foreign direct investments in India
It has been decided to grant general permission to banks to offer forward cover facility to non-
resident entities in respect of amounts deployed in India after 1993 by way of foreign direct
investments.
Earlier such hedging required prior approval of the Reserve Bank on a case to case basis.(5) Investments in overseas money/debt market
Banks are now permitted to invest in the overseas money market/debt instruments any amount as
decided by the banks' own management.
Earlier, banks were permitted to invest only up to 50 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital or
USD 25 million (whichever is higher) in the overseas market.
(6) Hedging of Tier I capital of foreign banks
Foreign banks operating in India are now free to take their own decision with regard to accessing
the market for hedging their Tier I capital.
Earlier, foreign banks were required to spread the hedging requirement over six months.
All these facilities would be available up to March 31, 2003, subject to review.
Detailed instructions are being issued to Authorised Dealers.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2002-03/646