Working Group on Operational and Prudential Guidelines on  STRIPS
May 22, 2002
A working group has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri M. R. Ramesh,
Managing Director, Clearing Corporation of India Limited to suggest operational and
prudential guidelines on Separately Traded Registered Interest and Principal Securities
(STRIPS). The working group will have members from select market participants and the
Reserve Bank of India as follows :
Shri C. E. S. Azariah, General Manager, State Bank of India
Shri Nitin Jain, Head, Fixed Income Group, ICICI Securities
Shri V. Srinivasan, Treasurer, J. P. Morgan Chase Bank
Mr.  Jean Michel Moinade, Treasurer, Credit Agricole Indosues, Singapore
Shri Tarun Mehrotri, Treasurer, HSBC Ltd., (representative of Fixed Income and Money
Market Derivatives Association of India)
Shri S. R. Kamath, General Manager, STCI (representative of Primary Dealers
Association of India)
Shri R. C. Das, General Manager, Department of Government Bank Accounts
Shri D. Mishra, General Manager, Department of Banking Operation & Development,
Central Office
Shri Jasbir Singh, General Manager, Banking, Mumbai Office
Shri A. Narayana Rao, General Manager, Department of Information Technology
Smt. Rekha Warriar, Deputy General Manager, Internal Debt Management Cell
The terms of reference of the Working Group are :
(i) To recommend criteria for choosing securities eligible for stripping and
reconstitution.
(ii) To recommend criteria for authorizing entities eligible to undertake stripping and
reconstitution.
(iii) To suggest the operational procedure for stripping and reconstitution.
(iv) To suggest changes in software in Negotiated Dealing System/Public Debt Office
so as to enable stripping and reconstitution of securities.
(v) To make suggestions in regard to investment classification and valuation of
stripped securities.
(vi) To make recommendations in regard to legal changes wherever required for
enabling stripping including clarification on SLR eligibility of stripped securities.
(vii) Any other related issue.
The Committee will submit its report as early as possible and in any case by  July 31,
2002.
It may be recalled that in the Governor's Statement of Monetary and Credit Policy for
the Year 2002-03 of April 29, 2002, it was stated (Paragraph 104) that a working group will
be constituted with representatives from banks and other market participants to suggest
operational and prudential guidelines on STRIPS.
Alpana Killawala
General ManagerPress Release : 2001-2002/1290