Merger of ICICI Ltd. with ICICI Bank Ltd.
April 26, 2002
An application for merger of ICICI Ltd. with ICICI Bank Ltd. was submitted to
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on October 25, 2001 for regulatory approvals.
The Reserve Bank examined the request keeping in view the statutory, regulatory
and other prudential requirements and the need for compliance by ICICI Bank Ltd. with
the various provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
It will be recalled that the Scheme of Merger has already received the sanction of
High Court of Gujarat on March 7, 2002 and the High Court of Mumbai on April 11.
After obtaining the approval of other regulatory agencies as required, the Reserve
Bank, has today approved the merger subject to the following conditions:
(i) Compliance with Reserve Requirements
The ICICI Bank Ltd. would comply with the Cash Reserve Requirements (under
Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934) and Statutory Liquidity Reserve
Requirements (under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949) as applicable to
banks on the net demand and time liabilities of the bank, inclusive of the liabilities
pertaining to ICICI Ltd. from the date of merger.  Consequently, ICICI Bank Ltd. would
have to comply with the CRR/SLR computed accordingly and with reference to the
position of Net Demand and Time Liabilities as required under existing instructions.
(ii) Other Prudential Norms
ICICI Bank Ltd. will continue to comply with all prudential requirements,
guidelines and other instructions as applicable to banks concerning capital adequacy,
asset classification, income recognition and provisioning, issued by the Reserve Bank
from time to time on the entire portfolio of assets and liabilities of the bank after the
merger.
(iii) Conditions relating to Swap Ratio
As the proposed merger is between a banking company and a financial institution,
all matters connected with shareholding including the swap ratio, will be governed by the
provisions of Companies Act, 1956, as provided.    In case of any disputes, the legal
provisions in the Companies Act and the decision of the Courts would apply.
(iv) Appointment of Directors
The bank should ensure compliance with Section 20 of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, concerning granting of loans to the companies in which directors of suchcompanies are also directors.  In respect of loans granted by ICICI Ltd. to companies
having common directors, while it will not be legally necessary for ICICI Bank Ltd. to
recall the loans already granted to such companies after the merger, it will not be open to
the bank to grant any fresh loans and advances to such companies after merger.  The
prohibition will include any renewal or enhancement of existing loan facilities.  The
restriction contained in Section 20 of the Act ibid, does not make any distinction between
professional directors and other directors and would apply to all directors.
(v) Priority Sector Lending
Considering that the advances of ICICI Ltd. were not subject to the requirement
applicable to banks in respect of priority sector lending, the bank would, after merger,
maintain an additional 10 per cent over and above the requirement of  40 per cent, i.e., a
total of 50 per cent of the net bank credit on the residual portion of the bank's advances.
This additional 10 per cent by way of priority sector advances will apply until such time
as the aggregate priority sector advances reaches a level of 40 per cent of the total net
bank credit of the bank.  The Reserve Bank’s existing instructions on sub-targets under
priority sector lending and eligibility of certain types of investments/funds for reckoning
as priority sector advances would apply to the bank.
(vi) Equity Exposure Ceiling  of 5%
The investments of ICICI Ltd. acquired by way of project finance as on the date
of merger would be kept outside the exposure ceiling of 5 per cent of advances towards
exposure to equity and equity linked instruments for a period of five years since these
investments need to be continued to avoid any adverse effect on the viability or
expansion of the project.  The bank should, however, mark to market the above
instruments and provide for any loss in their value in the manner prescribed for the
investments of the bank. Any incremental accretion to the above project-finance category
of equity investment will be reckoned within the 5 per cent ceiling for equity exposure
for the bank.
(vii) Investments in Other Companies
The bank should ensure that its investments in any of the companies in which
ICICI Ltd. had investments prior to the merger are in compliance with Section 19 (2) of
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, prohibiting holding of equity in excess of 30 per cent of
the paid-up share capital of the company concerned or 30 per cent of its own paid-up
share capital and reserves, whichever is less.
(viii) Subsidiaries
(a) While taking over the subsidiaries of ICICI Ltd. after merger, the bank
should ensure that the activities of the subsidiaries comply with the requirements of
permissible activities to be undertaken by a bank under Section 6 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 and Section 19 (1) of the Act ibid.(b) The take over of certain subsidiaries presently owned by ICICI Ltd. by
ICICI Bank Ltd. will be subject to approval, if necessary, by other regulatory agencies,
viz., IRDA, SEBI, NHB, etc.
(ix) Preference Share Capital
Section 12 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 requires that capital of a banking
company shall consist of ordinary shares only (except preference share issued before
1944). The inclusion of preference share capital of Rs. 350 crore (350 shares of Rs.1
crore each issued by ICICI Ltd. prior to merger), in the capital structure of the bank after
merger is, therefore, subject to the exemption from the application of the above provision
of Banking Regulation Act, 1949, granted by the Central Government in terms of Section
53 of the Act ibid for a period of five years.
(x) Valuation and Certification of the Assets of ICICI Ltd
ICICI Bank Ltd. should ensure that fair valuation of the assets of the ICICI Ltd. is
carried out by the statutory auditors to its satisfaction and that required provisioning
requirements are duly carried out in the books of ICICI Ltd. before the accounts are
merged. Certificates from statutory auditors should be obtained in this regard and kept on
record.
(xi)  Date of Merger
As the scheme of merger has been approved by the High Courts, the Reserve
Bank has no objection to the date of merger being the appointed date, viz., March 30,
2002 or any other date as per the orders of the High Court.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release no: 2001-2002/1190