RBI gives “in-principle” approvals to two new private banks
January 30, 2002
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has today given its `in-principle' approval to two applicants to
set up a bank in the private sector under the new guidelines. The two applicants were
recommended as suitable for setting up a bank in the private sector by a high level committee set
up by the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee was chaired by Dr. I G Patel, former Governor
of the Reserve Bank.
These are Shri Ashok Kapur and two other banking professionals (namely Shri Harkirat Singh
and Shri Rana Kapoor) with Rabobank and M/s.Kotak Mahindra Finance Ltd., a non-banking
finance company. In the case of Kotak Mahindra Finance Ltd., however, the recommendation of
the high level committee has been accepted with a change that the applicant should convert itself
into a new bank instead of setting up a bank and also continue simultaneously as an NBFC.
The in-principle approvals will be valid for a period of one year during which period the
applicants can mobilise the required capital and fulfil other conditions outlined in RBI guidelines
for licensing of new banks in the private sector.  On being satisfied that the applicants have
complied with the requisite conditions laid down by the RBI as part of “in-principle” approval,
they would be considered in due course, for grant of a licence for commencement of banking
business under Section 22 (1) of Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Until a regular licence is issued,
the applicants are barred from doing banking business.
The Reserve Bank will consider inviting fresh applications for new banks in the private sector
after three years from now after further reviewing the working of the private sector banks. The
guidelines issued in 2001 may also be revised if considered necessary.
I. Background
It may be recalled that guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector were revised by
the Reserve Bank on January 3, 2001.  Prior to this, the new banks to be set up in the private
sector were governed by the guidelines issued by RBI on January 22, 1993.  The revised
guidelines were based upon a review of the experience gained in the functioning of the new
banks into private sector and were finalised in consultation with the Government.
The main features of the revised guidelines vis-à-vis the guidelines issued in January 1993 are:
? The requirement of minimum paid-up capital was raised from Rs.100 crore to Rs.200 crore
with a proviso that it should be increased to Rs.300 crore within three years.
? The capital adequacy ratio of the bank to be set up should be 10 per cent on a continuous
basis from the commencement of operations (as against 8 per cent prescribed earlier).
? Companies, directly or indirectly connected with large industrial houses, could invest up to
10 per cent of the bank’s capital without having controlling interest in the new bank.
Some other requirements stipulated in the 1993 guidelines were retained. These are: (a)
minimum equity holding of 40 per cent by promoters with a lock in period of five years, (b)2
obligation to extend credit to priority sector to the extent of 40 per cent of net bank credit, (c)
opening of at least 25 per cent of total number of branches at rural and semi urban centres and
(d) dilution of stake of promoters to 40 per cent after one year of the bank’s operations.
The Reserve Bank had, in January 2001, also outlined the procedure for submission of
applications for setting up of new banks under the revised guidelines.  The applicants were
advised to furnish along with the application a detailed project report together with detailed
information on the background of promoters, their expertise, track record of business and
financial worth, details of credit/other facilities availed by the promoters/promoter
company(ies)/other group company(ies) with banks/financial institutions.  The last date for
submission of new applications was prescribed as March 31, 2001.
It was also clarified that licences will be issued by the reserve Bank on a very selective basis to
those who were likely to conform to the best standards of customer service and efficiency.  It
was also contemplated that preference will be given to promoters with expertise of financing
priority areas and in setting up banks specialising in the financing of rural and agro based
industries.  The number of licences to be issued in the next three years was proposed to be
restricted to two or three of the best acceptable proposals (including permission granted to any
NBFC for conversion into bank).3
II. Processing of Applications
It was decided that the Reserve Bank will first scrutinise the applications received to
ensure prima facie eligibility and then refer them to a High Level Advisory Committee
comprising:
Dr.I.G.Patel, former Governor of RBI Chairman
Shri C.G.Somiah, former Comptroller and Member
Auditor General of India
Shri Dipankar Basu, former Chairman of SBI Member
The Committee was free to set up its own procedures for screening the applications and call for
more information as well as have discussions with any applicant/s and seek clarification on any
issue as required by it.  The Committee was requested to submit its recommendations to the
Reserve Bank by June 30, 2001.
III. Recommendations
In response to its Press Release of January 3, 2001, the Reserve Bank received ten
applications before the prescribed due date, namely, March 31, 2001.  After a prima facie
scrutiny, the applications were referred to the High Level Advisory Committee.
The Committee had several sittings to scrutinise the applications and where necessary,
the applicants were called upon to make presentations.  After completing this exercise, the
Committee submitted its Report to the Reserve Bank on June 29, 2001.  In its Report, the
Committee recommended that the Reserve Bank may consider, after further examination, two
applications as suitable for issue of “in-principle” approvals for setting up new banks in the
private sector.  The applications recommended were from:
(i) Shri Ashok Kapur and two other banking professionals (namely Shri Harkirat
Singh and Shri Rana Kapoor) with Rabobank; and
(ii) M/s. Kotak Mahindra Finance Ltd., a non-banking finance company.
IV. RBI’s decision
Subsequent to the receipt of the Committee’s Report, the Reserve Bank carried out
further detailed examination of the two applications as per the normal procedure.  Wherever
necessary, reports on the applicants were obtained from banks, other regulatory agencies
including the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Department of Company Affairs
and other Departments of the Reserve Bank.  Requisite clarifications on various aspects of the
applications were also obtained.
Based on this exercise, the Reserve Bank has now decided to accept the recommendation
of the High Level Advisory Committee and issue “in-principle” approvals to the two applicants
recommended by the Committee. In the case of Kotak Mahindra Finance Ltd., however, the4
recommendation has been accepted with a change that the applicant should convert itself into a
new bank instead of setting up a bank and also continue simultaneously as an NBFC.
The “in-principle” approval will be valid for one year, during which period the applicants can
mobilise the required capital and fulfill other conditions outlined in RBI guidelines for licensing
of new banks in the private sector.  On being satisfied that the applicants have complied with the
requisite conditions laid down by the RBI as part of “in-principle” approval, the applicants
would then be considered in due course, for grant of a licence for commencement of banking
business under Section 22 (1) of Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Until a regular licence is issued,
the applicants are barred from doing banking business.
As indicated in the Press Release of January 3, 2001, the Reserve Bank will consider inviting
fresh applications for new banks in the private sector after three years from now after further
reviewing the working of the private sector banks. The guidelines issued in 2001 may also be
revised if considered necessary.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release: 2001-2002/858