RBI Consultative Group on Bank Boards submits Report
April 5, 2002
The Consultative Group of Directors of Banks and Financial Institutions (Fis)
submitted its report to the Reserve Bank of India. It may be recalled that the Mid-Term
Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001-2002, had announced that
a Consultative Group of Directors of Banks/Financial Institutions would be set up
under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.S.Ganguly, Director, Central Board of the Reserve
Bank of India. The Group was to look into the role of board of directors of banks/FIs,
and make recommendations, for consideration by the government/the Reserve Bank,
for making it more effective with a view to minimising risks and over-exposure, as also
to obtain feedback on the functioning of the boards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency,
disclosures, role of audit committees, etc. The Group had wide consultations with the
professional bodies connected with corporate governance principles and also met the
representative bank groups.
Major recommendations of the Group pertain to:
1) appointment of one more whole-time director on the boards of large-sized
nationalised banks;
2) establishment of appropriate due diligence procedures for appointment of directors
on the boards of private sector banks;
3) setting up of nomination committees of boards of banks to recommend appointment
of independent/non-executive directors;
4) building and creation of a pool of professional and talented people for board level
appointments in banks and also maintenance of the data for the purpose by the
Reserve Bank of India, etc.
Besides these, the recommendations also focus on the role and responsibilities of
independent / non-executive directors, their training and remuneration, commonality of
directors of banks and non-banking finance companies(NBFCs), information flow
to/from the board, composition of financial committees of the board,  etc.
The Group has also suggested that the banks could be asked to come up with a
strategy for implementation of the governance standards recommended. Once the
strategy is received from all banks, a periodical review of the progress of its
implementation could be undertaken.
The Reserve Bank of India is considering the recommendations of the Group in
consultation with the Government of India.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2001-2002/1119