RBI liberalises Capital Account
March 1, 2002
Following the announcement made by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
for 2002-2003, the Reserve Bank of India has issued the following notifications to
liberalise the capital account for certain purposes.
1. The Reserve Bank of India had issued a notification in September 2001 permitting
Indian companies to raise the 24 per cent limit on Foreign Institutional Investors'
(FIIs)' investment to the sectoral cap/statutory ceiling as applicable. The
Honourable Finance Minister has clarified in his Budget Speech that the FII
portfolio investment will not be subject to sectoral limits for foreign direct
investment except in specified sectors. The details of sectors and the limits
applicable will be specified by the Government/Reserve Bank of India in due
course.
2. The Reserve Bank of India has granted permission in February 2002 to Foreign
Institutional Investors (FIIs) to trade in exchange traded derivative contracts subject
to limits prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Board of India.  Earlier, FIIs
were permitted to invest in exchange traded index futures by way of hedging on the
recognised stock exchanges in India subject to the condition that the overall open
interest of the FII did not exceed 100 per cent of market value of the concerned
FII’s total investment.
3. Existing limits for Indian direct investment outside India under automatic route has
been raised from US dollar 50 million in a financial year to US dollar 100 million.
Further, such Indian investor may now buy foreign exchange upto 50 per cent of
their networth as on the date of last audited balance sheet as against the existing
limit of 25 per cent.
4. In order to enable the borrower to take advantage of the lower interest rates, it has
been decided to allow such borrowers to credit upto 100 per cent of their export
earnings to their exchange earners' foreign currency (EEFC) accounts against the
present ceiling of 50 per cent.  Presently prepayments of external commercial
borrowings (ECBs) are permitted out of borrowers EEFC account.  The approvals
for credits to EEFC account in these cases will be given by the Reserve Bank.  A
circular to authorised dealers has been issued.
5. With a view to providing full convertibility on non-resident deposit schemes, it has
been decided to discontinue non-resident non-repatriable (NRNR) account and
non-resident special rupee (NRSR) account schemes with effect from April 1,
2002. Banks shall not accept any fresh deposits or open any fresh account by way
of renewal or otherwise under these two schemes with effect from April 1, 2002. In
respect of existing accounts under these two schemes, they may follow the
following instructions :(a) The existing accounts under NRNR account scheme may be continued only upto
the date of maturity. The proceeds on maturity should be credited to the
accountholder’s Non-Resident (External) Rupee Account (NRE account).
(b) The existing term deposits under the NRSR account scheme may be continued till
the maturity. The maturity proceeds may be credited to  Non-Resident (Ordinary)
Rupee Account (NRO account) of the accountholder. Other accounts under
NRSR account scheme, viz., current and savings bank accounts should not be
permitted to continue after September 30, 2002. The accountholder will have the
option to close the account or to credit the balance to his NRO account.
Other relaxations
1. It has been decided that NRIs will now be able to repatriate their current income
by submitting a certificate from their chartered accountant certifying that the
amount proposed to be remitted is eligible for remittance and that applicable taxes
have been paid/ provided for. As per the extant guidelines, authorised dealers are
permitted to allow remittances by Non-resident Indians (NRIs) their current
incomes like rent, dividend, interest, pension, etc., net of applicable taxes, by
debit to their Non-Resident (Ordinary) Rupee (NRO) accounts.
2. It has also been decided to allow Indian corporates, with proven track record, to
contribute funds from their foreign exchange earnings for setting up chairs in
educational institutions abroad, and for other welfare measures, which are likely
to benefit community abroad.  Such cases will be considered by the Reserve Bank
on case-to-case basis.  Authorised dealers may forward all such applications to the
Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Exchange Control
Department, External Payments Division, Central Office Building, Mumbai-400
001, with relevant details.
Detailed guidelines have been issued by the Reserve Bank and are available on its
website www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/973