RBI issues Guidelines on Investment Fluctuation Reserves
January 10, 2002
The Reserve Bank has today issued guidelines to banks on building up of
Investment Fluctuation Reserve.  The guidelines finalised on the basis of the feedback
obtained from banks, are:
i.  Banks should transfer maximum amount of the gains realised on sale of
investment in securities to the Investment Fluctuation Reserve Account (IFR).
ii.  The objective should be to achieve IFR of a minimum of 5 per cent of the
portfolio, by transferring the gains realised on sale of investment, within a
period of 5 years. Banks are, however, free to build up higher percentage of IFR
of upto 10 per cent of the portfolio depending on the size and composition of
their portfolio, with the concurrence of their board of directors.
iii.  Banks should ensure that the unrealised gains on valuation of the investment
portfolio are not taken to the income account or to the IFR.
iv.  Individual scrips held under the Available for Sale category should be marked to
market at least at quarterly intervals.
v.  The Investment Fluctuation Reserve, consisting of realised gains from sale of
investments, would be eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 capital as before.
vi.  Banks are advised to assess the impact of changes in interest rates on their
investment portfolio. Banks may also initiate appropriate steps for moving over
to Value at Risk and Duration methods for measurement of interest rate risk.
vii.  Banks would be permitted to transfer balances from IFR to Profit and Loss
Account to meet the depreciation requirement on investment as a ‘below the
line’ item, as before.
The Reserve Bank has added that it will review the guidelines after one year in
the light of the experience gained by banks and other developments.
It may be recalled that the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
the year 2001-2002 had cautioned the banks on the need for following a more prudent
policy for utilising the gains realised on sale of investment in securities in the context of
the substantial decline in the yield on securities. The policy also urged banks to build up
adequate reserves to guard against any possible reversal of the interest rate environment
in future due to unexpected developments. The need for building up adequate reserves
to meet future depreciation requirement on investments was also discussed by the
Reserve Bank of India with major commercial banks.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No.2001-2002/787