Primary Responsibility of Crisis Prevention
*
has to be of the Country Itself: Jalan
Speaking at the special meeting of African Governors of the Central Banks convened
by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) at Basel,  Dr. Bimal Jalan, highlighted the
need for pragmatic and realistic macro-economic policies for safeguarding balance of
payments in emerging markets. Dr. Jalan was invited by the BIS to speak to African
Governors on the Indian experience, which has been highly successful in maintaining
financial stability during a period of turbulence in many of the emerging market economies in
the world. The meeting was held on Monday, December 16, 2002. Heads of 14 important
African countries attended the special Governors’ Meeting.
Drawing on the Indian experience, Governor Dr. Jalan said that the primary
responsibility for crisis prevention has to be that of the country itself. Emerging market
countries in particular need to adopt policies, which prevent an external crisis from arising.
Unlike in the past, India has been able to prevent external crises by adoption of sound
external management policies. In fact, India has nearly tripled its foreign exchange reserves
in the past 3 - 4 years, and has kept inflation low. India’s exchange markets have been
broadly stable and orderly and growth is likely to be in the region of 5 to 5.5 per cent despite
this year's drought. Based on the experience in the recent period, he said that there were some
important policy priorities:
• A stable macro-economic environment with low inflation, low current account
deficit and reasonable growth is essential to prevent crises. Fortunately, India
has been able to contain inflation below 3 per cent, has kept current account
deficit below 1 per cent and has achieved growth above 5 per cent;
• It needs to be ensured that in respect of prudential norms, transparency,
accounting and related standard and codes, best international practices are
adopted so that there are no surprises about the financial health of a country or
its financial policies. India has thus taken a decision to adopt such practices
and further strengthen supervisory, prudential, disclosure and accounting
standards;
• Careful monitoring and management of exchange rates without a fixed target
or a pre-announced target or a band. Flexibility in exchange rates is essential
as also the ability to intervene, if and when necessary;
• A policy to build a high level of foreign exchange reserves which takes into
account not only anticipated current account deficits but also liquidity at risk
arising from unanticipated capital movements;
• Finally, there is need for a judicious policy for management of the capital
account, in particular, short-term banking capital for financing investments
and growth has to be avoided.
Dr. Jalan also spoke on the Reserve Bank’s present position on money supply and
inflation targets for monetary policy formulation.  He said that experience in many countries
showed that the money supply target was not very effective in controlling inflation because of
the instability in money demand functions. Similarly, there are several technical problems in
adopting a specific inflation target to which monetary policy should respond, such as, the
composition of inflation to be targeted in the context of the large weight of food and fuel2
commodities in price indices. These items were not very sensitive in short run changes in
monetary policy.
The Reserve Bank has been generally following a “multiple indicator approach”
whereby all monetary as well as other macro-economic indicators are closely monitored by
the Reserve Bank of India. The Reserve Bank of India announces its monetary policy stance
twice a year through major monetary policy statements. The 'down-side' risks are also
carefully analysed and it was understood that the half-yearly monetary stance is subject to
change in case underlying macro-economic assumptions change.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press release : 2002-2003/628
* Special meeting of the African Governors at the Bank for International Settlements, Basel -
highlights of Dr. Jalan’s keynote address