Dr. Rakesh Mohan takes over as
RBI Deputy Governor
Dr. Rakesh Mohan took over as Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India today.
His appointment is for a period of three years.
Dr. Mohan has been appointed Deputy Governor in place of Dr. Y.V. Reddy who has
been appointed as Executive Director, International Monetary Fund.
As Deputy Governor, Dr. Mohan will look after the Monetary Policy Department,
Department of External Investments and Operations, Internal Debt Management Cell,
Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Department of Statistical Analysis and
Computer Services, Department of Government and Bank Accounts and Department of
Expenditure and Budgetary Control.
Born on January 14, 1948, Dr. Rakesh Mohan received his Masters degree and
Doctorate in Economics from Princeton University, and BA in Economics from Yale
University.  He is also a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering from Imperial College
of Science and Technology, University of London.
Dr. Rakesh Mohan has researched extensively in the areas of economic reforms and
liberalisation, industrial economics, urban economics, infrastructure studies and economic
regulation. He is the author of three books on urban economics and urban development and
co-author of one on Indian economic policy reforms, and of numerous articles.
Prior to taking over as Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank, Dr. Rakesh Mohan was
Director and Chief Executive of the Indian Council for Research and International Economic
Relations and Vice Chairman, Infrastructure Development Finance Company. He also held
the position of Adviser to the Finance Minister and Chief Economic Adviser between January
4, 2001 and May 15, 2002. He is also Member of the Economic Advisory Council to the
Prime Minister; Member of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India; Member of the
Board of Governors, Institute of Economic Growth; Member, Board of Governors, National
Institute of Public Finance and Policy; Member, Governing Body, National Council of
Applied Economic Research; Member, Board of Governors, Madras School of Economics.
He chaired the Expert Group on Railways (1999-2001); Expert Group on
Commercialisation of Infrastructure Projects (1994-96), and the Expert Group on
Petrochemicals (1992-93).
He also served as Economic Adviser to the Government of India in the Ministry of
Industry (1988-1996) where he played a major role in the formulation of the new Industrial,
Trade and Foreign Investment Policy, and at the Development Policy Division of the
Planning Commission (1986-1988).  He has also been Director of the National Housing
Bank, Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India, the Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India (ICICI), and the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).
He has also been a Member of Tariff Authority for Major Ports (1997-2002), and the
Securities Exchange Board of India (2001-02).
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release no. 2002-2003/270