Greater Volatility in Capital Flows and External Markets
require Building of Safety Walls: says Bimal Jalan
July 5, 2002
“Let each country take measures to build its own safety walls by providing for
higher reserves, more realistic policies to regulate capital flows and careful monitoring of
exchange rates. Let the international institutions play a supportive role through higher
and more automatic access to finance, subject to annual performance review. These
institutions must also be made less ideological and less political with greater voice for all
member countries rather than for a handful of industrial countries.” This was stated by
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a Bank of England symposium for
central bank governors in London on July 5.  Dr. Jalan was invited by Sir Eddie George,
Governor, Bank of England to be the lead speaker at the high level central bank
governors’ symposium on International Financial Architecture.
The Governor also pleaded for a larger voting power for developing member
countries in this context.  “It is one of the ironies of the last forty years that, although
developing countries as a group, have grown much faster than the developed countries
and their relative economic strength in terms of output and trade has increased
substantially, their actual voting power in Bretton Woods institutions has tended to
decline!” he argued.
Referring to the international financial scenario of the 90’s, the Governor
acknowledged that there had been gains as well as crises mainly on account of volatility
in capital flows and exchange rates in recent times. It was also a fact that the international
financial environment had become substantially more uncertain, unpredictable and
unstable in the 90s than in the previous half-century.
He pointed out that international institutions such as International Monetary Fund
(IMF), World Bank and International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
were busy in analysing the past experience and in introducing ways and means of
imparting greater transparency, early detection, better supervision, higher capital
requirements, more sustainable exchange rate regimes, stronger standards and codes and
involving the private sector in resolving crises. Some improvement had also been
effected in IMF financial facilities, such as, contingency financing facility, to provide
quick and higher access in the event of a crisis, he added.
According to Dr. Jalan, the recent financial crises have also underscored the fact
that most of the responsibility for coping with the burden of instability and volatility was
that of the country itself.  In this context, he listed three fundamental requirements drawn
from the Indian experience for preventing a financial crisis. These were careful
monitoring and management of exchange rates without a fixed target or a pre-announced
target or a band, a policy to build a high level of foreign exchange reserves which takes
into account not only anticipated current account deficits but also “liquidity at risk”arising from unanticipated capital movements and a judicious policy for management of
the capital account.
Recounting the Indian experience in external sector management during the 90’s,
the Governor stated that India had increased its foreign exchange reserves several times
over since the beginning of the 90s. They were now adequate to take care of all reversible
capital flows as well as current account deficits and were more than required under the
conservative “Guidotti rule”. Guidotti rule suggests reserves coverage for one year’s
capital account liabilities.
India’s short-term debt was also very low and the central bank’s forward
liabilities had been reduced to less than one per cent of reserves, he added.  “This has
gained us the confidence of the markets which has been more than evident even during
the recent period of uncertainties,” he pointed out. Flexibility in exchange rates was
essential, but so was the ability to intervene, if and when necessary, he argued.
In his view, short-term banking capital for financing investments and growth had
to be avoided, while foreign direct investment and portfolio investment had to be
encouraged. Explaining this, the Governor stated that in respect of foreign direct
investment and portfolio investment, there was a “cost” involved for the foreign investor
in quickly reversing such flows. This cost was not present in respect of fixed-interest
banking capital, particularly short-term capital.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release no. 2002-2003/21