January 10, 2001
The present Ways and Means Advances (WMA) Scheme to the State
Governments was brought in with effect from April 1, 1999 on the basis of the
Taking into account subsequent requests from several State Governments and
based on the review framework indicated by Vithal Committee, the matter was
2000 at RBI.  It was agreed in the said Conference, which was also attended by the
officials of Government of India, that an Informal Group of State Finance Secretaries
be constituted to review the existing Scheme and make recommendations and 
its report before end December 2000.  In the Conference, there was a request for
The Informal Group of the State Finance Secretari es submitted its report to
RBI and the Group had the benefit of detailed discussions with the officials of the
The RBI has considered all the recommendations of the Group and the
following decisions have been taken. A summary account of the decisions taken is as
Normal WMA limits
As recommended by the Group, it has been decided that the normal WMA
limits may be worked out taking into account the three years’ average of revenue
receipts and capital expenditure for fiscal years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 and
to this base a ratio of 2.4 per cent may be applied for the non-special category States
and 2.9 per cent for the special category States.  Accordingly, the total revised normal
WMA limits worked out to Rs.5 ,296 crore as against the present limits of Rs.3,941
crore or about 34 per cent.
RBI has also accepted the recommendation of the Group that the maximum
ratio of 2.4 per cent and 2.9 per cent should be frozen for the next three years and
every year the Reserve Bank of India will revise the normal WMA limits taking into
account the moving average of revenue receipts and capital expenditure for the latest
Overdraft Regulation Scheme
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Group and the requests made by
States from time to time and taking into account the problems being experienced
three years.  However, RBI would review this arrangement after two years.
Yearly revision
crore representing an increase of Rs.1,355 
under.
Decision taken
Ministry of Finance.
immediate implementation of revised WMA and Overdraft Scheme.
finalise
discussed in the latest meeting of State Finance Secretaries held on November 3 and 4,
Background
State Finance Secretaries and Government of India officials.
Vithal Committee and subsequent consultations RBI had with recommendations of the 
WMA Scheme, 2001 for State Governments2
currently in cash flow, it has been decided to increase the present 10 working days’
ad hoc
Furthermore, as recommended by the Group, for facilitating cash flow
management, it has been decided to extend the three days’ restriction for bringing
down the overdraft level within the level of 100 per cent normal WMA limit to five
The Vithal Committee had recommended that no State shall be allowed to run
overdraft with RBI for more than 20 working days during a quarter in a financial year.
While implementing the Vithal Committee’s recommendation it had been decided to
defer the decision for two years.  The Group of Finance Secretaries has recommended
that the decision could be deferred for one more year.  The recommendation has been
accepted by RBI and it has been decided to extend the deferment of 20 days’
Special WMA and Minimum Balance
It has been decided that the present Scheme of special WMA  and Minimum
Effectiveness
RBI has also decided to review the entire formula for WMA in light of
emerging conditions in State finances after two years with a view to bringing the
WMA Scheme 2001
The revised WMA Scheme, which will be called “ WMA Scheme 2001” 
( )  Taking into account the three years’ average of revenue receipts and capital
a ratio of 2.4 per cent for non special category States and 2.9 per cent for special
category States, the total normal WMA limits work out to Rs.5,296 crore.
(ii) The special WMA continues to be linked to the investments made by State
Governments in the Government of India Securities i.e. Dated Securities and Treasury
(iii) Overdraft Regulation Scheme which will be applicable to the State Governments
a) RBI will allow a State to run an overdraft for 12 consecutive working days instead
of 10 days at present.  In case the overdraft appears in the State’s account and
remains beyond 12 consecutive working days as per the current practice, RBI and
its agencies shall stop payments on behalf of the concerned State Governments.
This is an ad hoc measure subject to review.
with effect from February 1, 2001 is as under:
Bills.
expenditure for fiscal years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 and applying to this base
i
come into effect from February 1, 2001. The main features of the Scheme are as under:
will
revision in to effect from the third year.
Review
force from February 1, 2001.
It has been decided that the revised limits and above revisions would come into
Balance would continue.
upto April 2002 under the Overdraft Regulation Scheme. restriction 
days under the Overdraft Regulation Scheme.
 measure subject to review. restriction to 12 working days as an 3
 The overdraft shall not exceed 100 per cent of normal WMA limit.  On the first
overdraft amount should not exceed 100 per cent of normal WMA limit on any
c) Without prejudice to clause (a) above, if during the financial year, the amount of
overdraft exceeds 100 per cent of WMA limit on a second or any subsequent
occasion, the State shall be given five working days’ notice instead of the present
notice period of three working days to bring down the overdraft amount within the
be stopped.
The WMA Scheme 2001 is subject to review in its entirety at the end of two years
:2000-2001/996
Press Release No.
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
with a view to bringing the revision in to effect from the third year.
level of 100 per cent of normal WMA limit.  If this is not adhered to, payments will
subsequent occasion.
occasion that this is exceeded in a financial year, RBI shall advise the State that the
b)