June 27, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India today announced  rationalisation of some of the regulations and other
measures as applicable to Non-Banking Financial  Companies ( NBFCs) and Residuary Non-
RNBCs).  The changes made are -
( The extant provisions of NBFC Directions on  public deposits apply to
Commercial Papers ( CPs) also.  In view of the fact that the issue of   by NBFCs would be
governed by the guidelines issued by IECD vide Circular IECD. 3 / 08.15.01 / 2000-01 dated
October 10, 2000  and in order to facilitate raising of monies by NBFCs through this instrument,
it has been decided to exempt from the purview of public deposits the monies received by
The procedure of accounting for repossessed assets has been clarified and suitable
guidelines have been issued
To ensure adoption of a uniform  practice by companies for computing the net
amount of outstanding public deposit liabilities, it is clarified that NBFCs may maintain liquid
assets on deposit liabilities as netted off in respect of TDS actually  deducted and remitted to
In order to improve the accountability of the management of the comp any to its
shareholders, statutory auditors of NBFCs are advised that their observations on contravention of
RBI Act / Directions should also form part of the reports  submitted by them to the shareholders
of the company under Section 227 (2) of the Companies Act, 1956, besides directly reporting
It is observed that some of the NBFCs which have accepted and held public
deposits have since repaid entire public deposits or placed necessary amounts in escrow accounts
thus becoming non-public deposit taking companies.   They do not submit the periodical returns
to the Bank under the impression that they need not submit such returns since they are not
holding public deposits any longer.  It is clarified that companies having Certificate of
  to accept public deposits, though they may no longer hold public
deposit, are required to continue to furnish quarterly return on liquid assets, half-yearly return on
prudential norms, annual return on deposits, etc., in terms of Directions.  However, in order to
give some operational freedom, it has been decided to give an option to these NBFCs to either
)   The Reserve Bank has also made necessary amendments in the Directions to reflect
the change in the name of  credit rating agency viz. Duff & Phelps Credit Rating India Pvt. Ltd.
(DCR India) to FITCH Ratings India Pvt. Ltd., City of Calcutta to Kolkata and extension of
jurisdiction of  Regional Offices of Patna, Bhopal and Kanpur to cover the newly created States
Jharkand, 
Uttaranchal,  respectively. Chattisgarh and of 
(vi
submit periodic returns or apply for conversion into a non-public deposit taking company.
authorisation Registration with 
(v)
such contravention to RBI;
(iv)
Government;
(iii)
;
(ii)
NBFCs by issue of CP in accordance with the above guidelines;
CPs
i)
Banking Companies (
NBFCs Regulations for Commercial Papers RBI modifies The Reserve Bank has further advised shifting of its Regional Office of
Department of Non-Banking Supervision  earlier located at Lucknow  Office of RBI to 
P.V. Sadanandan
Release : 2000-01/1733
Press 
. Manager Asstt
Office of RBI.
Kanpur
(vii)