RBI releases Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India - 2000-01
November 15, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India has released its Report on Trend and Progress of Banking
in India 2000-01.
The Report gives a detailed account of the performance of commercial banks, co-
operative banks, financial institutions and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs).  The
Report also gives the developments in policy environment and regulatory and supervisory
framework applicable to these financial entities. The Report is divided into five Chapters
and contains detailed statistical tables on various parameters of financial performance of the
banks and financial institutions.
 The first chapter on banking developments and perspectives provides an overview
on the policy initiatives undertaken in the banking sector during 2000-01 and perspective
towards strengthening of prudential norms and introducing structural changes for further
improving the efficiency of the banking system.
 Chapter two on developments in commercial banking gives an analysis of the
financial performance of scheduled commercial banks in aggregate and separately for the
major banking groups, viz., public sector banks, private sector banks, foreign banks and
regional rural banks, in terms of important financial indicators, such as income, expenditure,
operating profits, net profits, spread, non-performing assets and capital to risk-weighted
assets ratio.  Bank-wise details of advances to agriculture and weaker sections are also
furnished, which is a significant feature in the Report.
Major developments and the regulatory initiatives relating to co-operative credit
institutions undertaken during 2000-01, including the role played by the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development are discussed in Chapter three. The chapter also gives
the bank-wise major indicators of financial performance of scheduled urban co-operative
banks.
Chapter four analyses the performance of select financial institutions (FIs) in general
and IDBI, ICICI and IFCI in particular.  The chapter also provides relative position of banks
and FIs in terms of their financial assets. A notable feature of the chapter is the comparative
status between banks and FIs with respect to select regulatory parameters.
Chapter five provides an overview of the components of the non-banking financial
sector and the working of the deposit accepting NBFCs regulated by the Reserve Bank.  The
chapter also contains the position relating to the prescribed regulatory framework and details
of interest rate structure and the region-wise distribution of public deposits of NBFCs.
The Report is available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in).
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release :2001-2002/581