March 2, 2001
The Development Research Group (DRG) in the Reserve Bank of India has
brought out a study entitled "A Leading Index for India's Exports", the twenty-third in
the DRG Study Series. The Study is authored by Dr. Dua of the Delhi School of
Economics and Dr. Anirvan Banerji of the Economics Cycles Research Institute
(ECRI), USA.
The DRG Study Series have an accent on policy-oriented research. They are
released for wide circulation with a view to generating constructive discussion among
professional economists and policy makers on subjects of current interest (the study is
available on the RBI website . The views expressed in these
With the progressive globalization of the Indian economy, monitoring the
external sector has assumed critical significance for policy formulation, both at the
national as well as at the corporate levels. A key driver in the external sector is the
level of exports because it directly impacts upon domestic economic performance.
Therefore, the construction of an accurate and reliable tool for forecasting the
direction of change of the level and growth rate of exports could greatly facilitate
This study constructs a leading index for exports that predicts movements in
real exports, price of exports, as well as the value of exports. The rationale for the
construction of the leading index for Indian exports is as follows: A cyclical
expansion in the economies of India’s trading partners is expected to enable an
increase in India’s exports. These cyclical upswings and downswings in the business
cycle (associated with the level of economic activity) and/or growth rate cycles of the
trading partners’ economies can be predicted by leading indices, typically six to nine
months in advance, and/or by long leading indices that typically have a few months’
extra lead over traditional leading indices. These cyclical changes in the economies of
the trading partners also encompass their demand for imports, or, for India’s exports.
In addition to the cyclical fluctuations in the economies of India’s trading partners,
movements in the exchange rate vis-à-vis the trading partners are also a leading
indicator of exports. If a cyclical expansion in the economies of India’s trading
partners is accompanied by a depreciation in the currencies of the trading partners, the
net impact on India’s exports will be ambiguous since the expansionary impact will
be partly or wholly offset by the increasing cost of imports faced by the trading
partners. Therefore, exchange rate fluctuations must also be taken into account along
with cyclical factors in the economies of India’s trading partners to accurately gauge
current and future exports of the Indian economy. Thus, leading indices of India’s
trading partners can provide a basis to forecast India’s exports and a weighted average
of the leading indices of these countries can be used to predict fluctuations in India’s
exports.
The composite leading index developed in this study combines information in
the 36 country real effective exchange rate of the Indian rupee and the long leading
indices of India’s 15 major trading partners developed at the ECRI. The 15 countries
are the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Germany, France, the U.K., Italy, Spain, Switzerland,
Sweden, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Australia and New Zealand, which collectively
account for about half of India’s total exports. The predictive ability of the composite
policy formulation.
studies are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank.
http://www.rbi.org.in)
Pami 
A Leading Index for Indian Exportsindex (created on the basis of the real exchange rate and the leading indices of 15
countries) is evaluated vis-a-vis cyclical movements in the quantum index of exports,
unit value of exports and their total value over the past 25 years. The results show that
the leading index of Indian exports (in level and growth form) would have anticipated
most of the cyclical turns in real exports, the price of exports, and the value of exports
over the past 25 years. The results are robust since the standard deviations of the leads
are typically low. On the basis of the past performance of the leading index, its
N. L. 
Release : 2000-2001/1226
Press 
. Manager Asstt
Rao
predictive power can only be expected to improve further in the future.