Facts on GTB investigation
A report has appeared in certain section of the press today alleging that the RBI
has closed the chapter on trying to unearth any alleged wrong doing by GTB or its
promoters in the capital market. We wish to clarify that the report is totally baseless,
• The RBI noticed some unusual price movements in GTB share prices in
November last and requested SEBI, the regulator of capital markets to look into
the matter.
• SEBI in February wrote to RBI that it has prima facie found evidence of price
rigging in GTB share prices; and that it would shortly give the RBI a detailed
report.
• Meanwhile, the RBI received an application from GTB and UTI bank, duly
• RBI wrote to SEBI to expedite the investigations and send the findings to RBI by
• In the wake of the happenings in the market, the RBI also asked UTI to get the
valuation of the proposal done by another independent 
• RBI received another interim report from SEBI on March 30, 2001 stating that the
• RBI received a letter from GTB on April 4, 2001 stating that it desires to
• RBI wrote on April 4, 2001 itself to UTI enclosing a copy of the letter received
from GTB adding that the RBI is treating the matter in regard to approval of
merger of GTB and UTI Bank as closed. A copy of the same letter was endorsed
The sequence of events clearly indicates that the RBI had at no point in time given an
informal or formal approval for the merger proposal; nor had it ignored the aspect of
alleged rigging of share prices of GTB but had in fact written to UTI to go in for a fresh
and independent valuation as regards swap ratio and also requested SEBI to expedite its
 in the matter and furnish its report before end March 2001. The RBI awaits the
Release : 2000-2001/1378
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
final report from SEBI on its investigations in fluctuations in GTB share prices.
enquiries
to UTI Bank and SEBI for information.
withdraw the merger proposal.
detailed investigations to come to final findings would take some more time.
valuer.
end-March 2001.
approved by their respective boards, about their proposed merger.
The facts of the case are:
mischievous and intended to mislead the public.