Rajbhasha Shield 1999-2000
Prize Distribution
August 6, 2001
` It is true that the banking business is our foremost duty, but any type of business
needs a language for communication. Incidentally, most of our functions are done in
English for certain reasons, although the work of the people ought to be done in 
own language. This is an integral part of customer service. There have been lots of efforts
in this direction at various levels, but a lot is yet to be done at the highest level.' This was
stated by Dr.  Jalan , Governor of Reserve Bank of India while addressing the
representatives of public sector banks and financial institutions as chief guest. He was
distributing prizes at the function of the Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield, Bilingual and
Governor,  further said that as per the Government's orders, the review of
the Official Language Hindi should not be kept limited to its meetings only but the
progress of Hindi should be discussed at all the meetings of the Administrative heads and
it should be included as an agenda item for all such meetings on a regular basis.  He
expressed the belief that the banks would come forward to increase the use of Hindi as
official language and also inspire others to do so.
Deputy Governor, Shri Vepa Kamesam presided over the function. Senior
executives of the public sector banks and financial institutions as also senior executives
and officers of the Reserve Bank were also present.  Prizes were also awarded to the
Vepa the language of the Government and the language
of the public should be one and the same.  The Government work should be done in the
language easily understood by the public.'  He was of the view that the Hindi is
understood by the masses throughout the country.  Hindi is not the language of any
particular state.  He appealed to adhere to the Government's policy in this regard and try
their best to achieve the targets.
Earlier, Shri S.L.Parmar ,  Reserve Bank of India, welcomed the Governor,
Shri G.K.Sharma, Chief General Manager, Department of Administration and
Personnel proposed a vote of thanks.  Dr. Shriniwas Dwivedi, General manager (Officer-
in-Charge), 
programme. Rajbhasha Department, Reserve Bank of India conducted the 
Deputy Governor and representatives of banks and other financial institutions.
Kamesam stated that ' Shri 
winners of inter-bank Hindi essay competition.
Dr.Jalan
Hindi House Journals and Inter-Bank Hindi Essay Competition held here today.
Bimal
their
Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield Competition 1999-2000
Region "A" Position
First
Baroda
Region "B"
First
Baroda
Maharashtra
Region "C"
First
Baroda
Bilingual House Journal Competition 1999-2000
Name of the Bank / Financial Institution Position
First
Maharashtra
IDBI
I.F.C.I.
Baroda
Hindi House Journal Competition - 1999-2000
Name of the Bank / Financial Institution
First
SIDBI
INDORE
Fourth STATE BANK OF 
Third CORPORATION  BANK
Second
NABARD
Position
Fourth Bank of 
Fourth Exim Bank
Fourth
Third
Second Bank of 
Union Bank of India
Fourth Bank of India
Fourth Canara Bank
Fourth Bank of 
Third Allahabad Bank
Second Oriental Bank of Commerce
Dena Bank
Position
Fourth Central Bank of India
Fourth Bank of India
Fourth Canara Bank
Third Bank of 
Second Bank of 
Allahabad
Position
Fourth Bank of India
Fourth Punjab National Bank
Fourth Bank of 
Third Canara Bank
Second Allahabad Bank
Oriental Bank of Commerce
Results of Reserve Bank Inter-Bank Hindi Essay Competition 2000-2001
Region  "A"
Rajendra Singh, Indian Overseas Bank, First
Agarwal, Union Bank of India, M.P.
Region "B" Position
Harendrarai, Central Bank of India, Anand,Gujarat First
G.B. 
Region "C"
Dr. Shivsubramanyam, Corporation Bank, First
Ms. Hemlata 
Suraj 
Release : 2001-02/156
Press 
Manager
Prakash
Second Panaji Kanchkaratti, State Bank of India, Pandit 
Pradesh
Andhra Vijaywada, Pudi 
Position
Currency Management, Mumbai.
Second Kulkarni, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Shri 
Utsav Shri 
Second Raipur, Shri Rajesh 
Lucknow Shri 
Position