February 2, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India has today advised banks about the exemption granted
by Ministry of Home Affairs, Central Government to all associations from provision of
Foreign contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 to accept foreign contribution, in cash or
kind, to provide relief to earthquake victims without obtaining a formal approval of the
Central Government.  The Ministry of Home Affairs issued a notification on February 1,
2001 granting this exemption with immediate effect and up to March 31, 2001.  The
exemption is available to all associations (other than political parties) having a definite
To avail the exemption the associations would need to follow certain conditions.
Each such association would, however, need to open a new bank account for this purpose
Gujarat Earthquake Relief Account".  The association would need
to receive contribution for Gujarat earthquake victims in this designated account.  The
associations would also need to maintain a separate set of accounts and records in respect
of foreign contributions received for earthquake relief. They would need to submit details
of such accounts to Ministry of Home Affairs within one week of opening such account
and give intimation regarding receipt of foreign contribution within four months of the
Earlier, the Reserve Bank relaxed the Ways and Means Advances and Overdraft
Regulations for the State of Gujarat till the end of February 2001. The Reserve Bank had
asked banks to advise all their branches, in particular those situated in Gujarat, to ensure
immediate credit of payments received towards relief for Gujarat earthquake victims and
not to delay crediting of their accounts for want of purpose of remittance or other such
Release : 2000/2001/1108
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
details.  Such particulars could be collected later, it had stated.
close of year to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
and designate it as the "
cultural, economic, educational, religious or social programme.
without Prior Permission from Government
Associations in India can receive Funds
Foreign Contributions for Quake Victims: