Report (Part-III) of the Advisory Group on
July 16, 2001
The Advisory Group on "Payment and Settlement System" has recommended a set of
actions including establishment of a clearing agent abroad by the Clearing Corporation of
India ( ), institution of a separate guarantee fund for the foreign exchange clearing,
appropriate integration between the participating banks and the  and their interface with
the real-time gross settlement ( RTGS
It may be recalled that a Sta
Codes was constituted in December 1999 under the Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India and Secretary (Economic Affairs), Government of India as
Alternate Chairman.  The Standing Committee was to identify and monitor developments in
global standards and codes, to consider aspects of applicability of these standards to Indian
financial system, to periodically review the status and to make available its reports to 
organisations in public or private sector.
          The Standing Committee had constituted ten advisory groups consisting of experts in
different subject areas. One of these Advisory Groups was on “Payment and Settlement
System” under the Chairmanship of Shri M.G.Bhide (Chairman, NIBM, Pune) and Dr.
R.H.Patil (former Managing Director, NSE, Mumbai) as member.  The Group submitted
Part-III of its Report to the Standing Committee on July 9, 2001.  Parts I and II were released
The Group in Part III of its Report has examined the existing arrangements for
settlement of foreign exchange transactions prevailing in India, deficiencies in the present
system, international practices, etc., as also the emergence of the Clearing Corporation of
India (
), which is expected to play a major role in risk mitigation. CCI
in  September 2000 and January 2001, respectively.
concerned 
all
nding Committee on International Financial Standards and
) system.
CCI
CCI
“Payment and Settlement System” releasedIn accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, the full text of the
Report of the Advisory Group on “Payment and Settlement Styem” has been placed on the RBI
The recommendations contained in this Report are the product of an independent
evaluation and assessment of standards and codes undertaken by non-official experts.
They do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank, or the Government of India or any other
Release : 2001-2001/64
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
concerned regulatory agency.
www.rbi.org.in Website 