BIS Working Group Meets in Delhi
February 7, 2001
A Working Group on Capital set up by the Core Principles Liaison Group
(CPLG) of the Bank for International Settlements is currently meeting in New Delhi to
discuss the proposals of the second consultative paper on the new capital accord. The
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision had released the second consultative paper on
the new capital accord in January 2001. The first consultative paper was released in June
The Working Group on Capital, chaired by Mr. Charles Freeland, Deputy
Secretary General of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, is expected to
provide the viewpoint of the supervisors of the emerging economies on the new capital
accord. The proposals of the accord on capital will have a bearing on the banking systems
The members of the Group include supervisory agencies and central banks from
non G-10 countries and multilateral agencies, such as, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. Supervisory agencies and central banks from South America,
Europe, Africa, Australia and South East Asia, including India, are participating in the
discussions. India is represented by Shri S P Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
India on the Group. Several recommendations made by this Group earlier on the first
consultative paper on the new capital accord were accepted by the Basel Committee on
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is a committee of the supervisory
agencies of G-10 countries. The Committee has emerged as the standard setting body of
banks and banking supervisors. In recent years, the Committee has also been actively
consulting with the supervisory agencies of the non-G-10 countries as a part of the
standard setting exercise. Consequently, it has set up a Core Principles Liaison Group
(CPLG) comprising the supervisory agencies of a few select non-G-10 countries,
The Reserve Bank of India has hosted the meeting which will conclude on
Release : 2000-01/11
26
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
February 9.
including the Reserve Bank of India.
Banking Supervision and have been incorporated in the second consultative paper.
in non-G-10 countries.
last year.
for Consultations on New Capital Accord