June 30, 2001
Shri Vepa Kamesam and Shri G.P. Muniappan will take over as the Deputy
Governors of the Reserve Bank of India from July 1, 2001.  Both will hold charge for a
A graduate in Science, Shri Vepa Kamesam joined the State Bank of India as
Probationary Officer in November 1963 and has held several important assignments.  
has served as Manager, Money and Foreign Exchange at State Bank of India, Singapore
Off-shore Banking Unit; Chief Dealer, Foreign Department, Calcutta; Deputy General
Manager, Overseas Branch, Calcutta; General Manger (Commercial and Institutional
Banking),  Local Head Office; General Manager, Foreign Department,
Calcutta; General Manager and Chief General Manager for UK Operations in SBI,
London.  On his repatriation to India as Deputy Managing Director, Shri 
Travancore from August 1998.
Prior to coming to the Reserve Bank Shri Kamesam was Managing Director of
State Bank of India in-charge of the National Banking Group.
A career central banker, Shri Muniappan has been a first class post graduate in
Economics with specialisation in economic planning and economic growth.  He joined
the Reserve Bank in 1965 and worked through various offices and departments over the
next 35 years.  His experience in the central bank is largely in banking regulation and
supervision and exchange control.  Shri Muniappan also has a thesis on "Character and
Dimension of International Banking Business of Indian Banks and an appropriate risk
management and control system" to his credit.  He wrote the thesis for a post graduate
diploma in Bank Management from National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM).
Shri Muniappan sought voluntary retirement from  the Reserve Bank in March 2001 as
the Executive Director in charge of banking regulation and supervision.  Prior to joining
the Reserve Bank as the Deputy Governor, Shri Muniappan was Banking Ombudsman at
Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, is reappointed Deputy Governor with effect
from September 1, 2001.
Shri Kamesam will look after Exchange Control Department, Department of
Currency Management, Department of Information Technology, Rural Planning & Credit
Department, Industrial & Export Credit Department, Department of Administration &
Personnel Management (including Vigilance Cell), Human Resources Development
Department, Central Security Cell, Inspection Department and Premises Department.
Shri Muniappan will look after Department of Banking Operations &
Development, Department of Banking Supervision, Financial Institutions Division,
Urban Banks Department, Department of Non-Banking Supervision, Department of
Thiruvananthapuram.
worked as Managing Director of State Bank of 
Kamesam
Hyderabad
He
period of two years or till they attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier.
RBI Deputy GovernorsFinancial Companies, Legal Department and Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Dr. Reddy will look after Department of Economic Analysis and Policy,
Department of Statistical Analysis and Computer Services, Monetary Policy Department,
Internal Debt Management Cell, Department of External Investments & Operations,
Department of Government & Bank Accounts, Department of Expenditure & Budgetary
Control, Secretary's Department and Inter-departmental Coordination (including JPC
matters).
S. 
Release : 2000-2001/1755
Press 
Asstt. General Manager
Ramachandran
Corporation.