Finance Minister Meets RBI Central Board of Directors
The customary post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India
with the Finance Minister (FM) was held in New Delhi today. The meeting was also
attended by Shri B. Vikhe Patil, Minister of State for Banking, Insurance and
Expenditure, Finance Secretary Shri Ajit Kumar, Special Secretary, Banking Shri Devi
Dayal, and Shri Rakesh Mohan, Adviser to the FM. Among the Board members present
were Shri K Madhava Rao, State Election Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh, Shri Mihir
Rakshit, Director, Monetary Research Project, ICRA, Shri K P Singh, Chairman, DLF
Group, Shri D S Brar, CEO & MD, Ranbaxy Laboratories, Shri N R Narayana Murthy,
Chairman & CEO, Infosys Technologies, Shri C N R Rao, President, Jawaharlal Nehru
Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Shri A P J Abdul Kalam, Principal Scientific
Adviser to Govt. Of India, Shri Y H Malegam, Chartered Accountant, Senior Partner
Billimoria & Company, Shri A S Ganguly, Chairman ICI Ltd., Shri Suresh Krishna,
Chairman & MD Sundaram Fasteners, Shri H P Ranina, Advocate, Supreme Court, Shri
Welcoming the Hon’ble Finance Minister Shri Yashwant Sinha, Minister of State Shri
Vikhe Patil and Secretaries of the Ministry, the Governor stated that despite the
unexpected turbulence seen in the equity market recently, the overall macro-economic
environment remained highly positive. Outside petroleum products, the overall inflation
rate has been reasonably satisfactory. The liquidity conditions are easy and the interest
rates have tended to be soft. Export growth has also been very impressive and, foreign
exchange reserves are at the highest level ever. This should enable the country to meet
normal import requirements as well as unforeseen contingencies. The Governor
particularly welcomed the fiscal stance of the Budget and several structural reform
measures designed to boost economic growth in the country. The Governor said that the
RBI Board was also fully committed to pursuing policies, which would further accelerate
The FM welcoming the reconstituted Board described it as a distinguished, well-
represented Board endowed with wisdom. He expressed confidence in the role and
He expressed his appreciation for the prompt action taken by the RBI and SEBI in
ensuring the stability in the face of developments in the financial markets in the last
week. He explained to the Board the importance of political economy issues and the
significance of involving the state governments in the process of reforms. In particular,
he emphasized the complexities in implementation of the second phase of reforms
In regard to the budget initiatives, he made particular mention of initiatives relating to
fiscal deficit, inter generational equity, interest rate flexibility, labour market reforms,
food economy and agriculture development, and emphasised the human face of reforms.
He referred to the assurance given to the industry that there will be no change in the tax
regime adverse to the interest of the participants, and that notice of changes in the
because of the hard actions required and legislative changes involved.
onerous responsibility being discharged by the RBI.
growth in an environment of financial stability.
Jaipur. V S Vyas, economist, Former Director, Institute of Development Studies, medium-term has also been given in the budget.  Above all, he said, we cannot fight
poverty without high economic growth.
The Hon’ble Minister of State, Mr. Vikhe Patil emphasised the importance of restoring
growth, investment and credit flow in agriculture.  He referred to the critical role of
NABARD and RBI in this regard.
The members of the Board welcomed the realistic measures in the budget aimed at
structural transformation of the economy and made several suggestions to enhance the
:2000-2001/1293
Press Release
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
effective implementation of the reform process.