Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India 2000-2001
The Reserve Bank of India has published “Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India,
th
2000-2001”. This is 56 edition of the volume. The publication contains comprehensive data on
operations of Scheduled Commercial Banks (including the Regional Rural Banks) in India for the
year 2000-2001. These data are obtained from the published annual accounts of banks.
Additionally, data collected by the Reserve Bank of India through some important returns like
Basic Statistical Returns, Priority Sector Returns, etc. are included in this publication. A brief
profile of co-operative banks is also presented through data on State-wise distribution of number of
offices and major components of assets and liabilities of Urban Co-operative banks, State and
District Central Co-operative banks.
The publication is divided into three parts: (i) Summary Tables, (ii) Detailed Tables and (iii)
Appendices. While the summary tables give consolidated position of all banks and/or their break-up
at bank-groups level, the detailed tables provide bank-wise data. Details of individual commercial
banks’ offices in States/Union Territories and at the all-India level have been provided in the form of
Appendices.
Bank-wise details cover major components of their liabilities and assets, including
contingent liabilities and income and expenditures. Under new disclosure norms, banks (other than
the Regional Rural Banks) are now required to publish information on the movements of non-
performing assets (NPAs), advances to sensitive sectors, maturity pattern of selected items of
liabilities and assets, break-up of provisions and contingencies in the notes to their annual accounts.
Such items are also covered in this publication. To facilitate comparison, selected profitability and
other important financial ratios of individual banks have also been given in a table at the end.
The publication is priced at Rs.150 (Rs.200 by registered book post and US $ 50 for
overseas dispatch). From this year, data published in this volume are also made available in CD-
ROM. The CD-ROM is priced at Rs.150 (Rs.225 by post and US $ 50 by airmail). Copies of the
volume/CDs can be obtained from the Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publication
(Sales section), Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, Amar
Building (Ground Floor), P. B. No.1036, Mumbai – 400 001. Cheques/drafts should be drawn in
favour of the “Reserve Bank of India”, payable at Mumbai. The data can also be accessed through
Internet at http://www.rbi.org.in
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release : 2001-2002/751