Report of Advisory Group on “Bankruptcy Laws ”  released
May 17, 2001
The Advisory Group on Bankruptcy Laws has recommended, inter alia , passing of a new
legislation on a comprehensive bankruptcy code, and introduction of a professional bankruptcy
institution known as the “Trustee” ,  repeal of Sick Industrial Company (Special Provisions) Act
and abolition of BIFR. The report also has dealt with an effective trigger point for the operation
of the bankruptcy code, special provisions for banks and financial institutions, cross-border
bankruptcy principles, and an orderly and effective insolvency procedures. The Advisory Group
on Bankruptcy Laws made the recommendations after a review and analyse of the existing status
of the legislation in relation to international standards on bankruptcy laws and the position
It may be recalled that Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes was
constituted in December 1999 under the Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor,
Reserve Bank of India with  Secretary (Economic Affairs), Government of India as Alternate
Chairman in order to identify and monitor developments in global standards and codes, consider
aspects of applicability of these standards to Indian financial system, periodically review the
organisations in public or private sector.
The Standing Committee constituted ten Advisory Groups consisting of experts in different
subject areas. The Advisory Group on “Bankruptcy Laws” under the Chairmanship of Dr.
N.L.Mitra, Director, Centre for Business Law Studies, Bangalore with  Shri Bimal Kumar
Chatterjee, Shri H. Banerjee, Shri S.Krishnaswamy, Shri Cyril Shroff, Dr. T.C.A. Anant and Dr.
Shubhashis Gangopadhyay as Members. Shri S.H.Bhojani, Shri N.V.Deshpande, 
M.S.Verma and Dr. R.H.Patil were Special Invitees. The Advisory Group   submitted  its report
to the Standing Committee on May 9, 2001.
 accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, it has been decided to
make the report available to the public for wider discussion.  The full text of the Report of the
Advisory Group on “Bankruptcy Laws” has been placed on the RBI 
The recommendations contained in this report are the product of independent evaluation and
assessment of standards and codes undertaken by non-official experts, and do not reflect the
views of the Reserve Bank, or the Government of India or any other concerned regulatory
Release : 2000-2001/1570
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
agencies.
www.rbi.org.in Website 
 In
Shri
status and make available its Reports to all  concerned 
obtaining in other countries.