May 31, 2001
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which is setting global standards and
benchmarks on regulatory/supervisory practices, had released in June 1999, a Consultative
Paper on a New Capital Adequacy Framework for comments by market players and Central
Banks.  Recognising the implications of the new framework for emerging markets,
particularly for India, The Reserve Bank of India had forwarded its comments on the new
framework to the Basel Committee in March 2000. The comments were also placed on the
The Basel Committee released the Second Consultative Document on the proposed
New Basel Capital Accord in January 2001, which contained refined proposal of the three
Discipline. Several of the concerns expressed and recommendations made by India and other
emerging markets on the first consultative document were taken into account and were
addressed in the second document.
The Reserve Bank has examined the revised proposals in detail and has forwarded its
comments on the New Accord to the Basle Committee. The Reserve Bank’s views in brief
are:
( i) The complexity and sophistication of the proposals restricts its universal application in
emerging markets, where the banks continue to be the major segment in financial
intermediation and would be facing considerable challenges in adopting all the proposals. The
spirit of flexibility, universal applicability and discretion to national supervisors, consistent
with the macro economic conditions specific to emerging markets ought to be preserved while
finalizing the New Accord.
(ii) The New Accord should initially be applied to all internationally active banks. Further, a
simplified standardised approach may be evolved for other banks and the national supervisors
(iii) To ensure uniform application across all jurisdictions, the Basel Committee should define
what constitute internationally active and significant banks. In this regard, the reserve Bank is
of the view that all banks with cross-border business exceeding 15 per cent of their total
business may be defined as internationally active banks. Significant banks may be defined as
those banks with complex structures and whose market share in the total assets of the
domestic banking system exceeds one per cent.
(iv) To moderate the cross-holdings of capital, Basel Committee may consider prescribing a
material limit (10 per cent of total capital) upto which cross-holdings of capital and other
regulatory investments could be permitted and any excess investments above the limit would
(v) External Credit Assessment Institutions ( ECAIs) should not be assigned the direct
responsibility for risk assessment of banking book assets. However, such of the Export Credit
Agencies ( ECAs) that disclose publicly their risk scores, rating process and procedure and
subscribe to the publicly disclosed OECD methodology and qualify for use by national
supervisors may be used for assigning preferential risk weights.
be deducted from total capital.
should have discretion to implement the New Accord, in a phased manner.
pillars of the New Accord – Minimum Capital Requirements, Supervisory Review and Market
www.rbi.org.in website 
RBI Comments on New Capital Adequacy Framework2
(vi) Risk weighting of banks should be de-linked from that of the credit rating of sovereigns
in which they are incorporated. Instead, preferential risk weights should be assigned on the
(vii) On the lines of discretion provided in the case of claims on sovereigns, the national
supervisors may be given discretion to assign lower risk weight (one category less 
than the risk weight to claims on sovereign), subject to a floor of 20 per cent to claims on all
banks, which are denominated in domestic currency and funded in that currency. Further,
(viii) The adoption of the Internal Rating Based (IRB) approach, as envisaged, may be
possible only for internationally active banks within the timeframe and transition period
proposed by the Committee. For other banks, as an alternative, it is proposed that a simplified
standardised approach to assign preferential risk weights based on internal ratings of banks
may be evolved, subject to complying with the minimum standards prescribed by the 
Committee for IRB approach. Under this approach,  risk weights, instead of the
continuous function of Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default (LGD) and Exposure
at Default (EAD), in the range of 20 per cent to 150 per cent could be assigned, subject to
mapping of these ratings based on the robustness of the rating systems and the benchmark PD
(ix) Unsecured portion of assets that are overdue over 90 days need not be placed under a
  
(x) Until a scientific method to measure the operational risk across countries is evolved, the
Basel Committee may consider prescribing a lower capital charge of 15 per cent of the gross
income or 10 per cent of the current capital requirement to align capital to the underlying risk
profile. National supervisors may, however, be given discretion to prescribe higher capital
( The capital charge for specific risk in the banking and trading books should be consistent
( xii) The national supervisors may be given discretion to implement the New Accord, in a
phased manner by banks, which are not internationally active and are engaged predominantly
( xiii) Unless suitably modified, taking into account the above modifications, the adoption of
the New Accord in its present format would result in significant increase in the capital charge
for banks, especially in emerging markets.
It is essential that the Basel Committee should evolve a simplified 
approach, which could be adopted uniformly by all banks that are not internationally active.
Further, the transitional arrangements proposed in the New Accord may not be sufficient for
these banks. National supervisors may, therefore, be given discretion to decide on the time
frame for implementing the Accord and applying it to various banks in their jurisdiction
Press Release No. 1629/2000-2001
outliers
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
www.rbi.org.in website The detailed comments can be accessed at RBI’s 
depending upon the scale and complexity of their operations.
standardised
in traditional banking.
to avoid regulatory arbitrages.
xi)
’. ‘ charge towards operational risk in case of banks, which may be considered as 
separate higher-risk category.
estimated by the supervisor on the basis of pooled data from select banks.
standardised
Basel
preferential risk weights should not be linked to the maturity of the claims.
favourable
basis of their underlying strength and creditworthiness.