WSS)
August 3, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India has changed some of the tables in its Weekly
Statistical Supplement ( WSS) to the monthly Bulletin of the Reserve Bank of India.
Released every Saturday, the supplement contains data on economy, banking and
financial markets. The changes have been necessitated on account of some recent
decisions, such as, discontinuation of auctions of 14-day and 182-day Government of
India Treasury Bills with effect from the week beginning May 14, 2001,
 of Liquidity Adjustment Facility ( ) effective June 5, 2000 and
the decision to disseminate information on cumulative cash balances held by the
Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks) with Reserve Bank
of India. Implementation of these decisions have necessitated some new tables,
changes in the formats of some existing tables and has made some tables redundant.
WSS dated August 4, 2001 are:
1. Tables (No. 9 and No. 11 in the existing WSS) presenting data on auctions of 14-
2. Accordingly, formats of related tables (No. 17b, 19 and 21 on turnover in
Government securities market, treasury bills outstanding and Secondary market
transactions in Government securities, have been revised. These tables contained
3. A new table (no. 9) containing data on Repo/Reverse Repo Auctions under
Liquidity Adjustment Facility ( LAF) has been introduced. The data would be
presented for all the dates on which LAF auctions have been held during the
relevant week.
4. Another new table (No. 12) will present data on Cumulative Cash Balances of
Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding the Regional Rural Banks) with the
Reserve Bank of India. This data would be reported on a daily cumulative basis
for the reporting fortnight.
P.V.Sadanandan
Release : 2001-02/142
Press 
Assistant Manager
details of 14-day and 182-day Government of India Treasury Bills.
day and 182-day Government of India Treasury Bills have been discontinued.
Details of the changes with effect from the 
The changes made in the tables reflect these decisions.
LAF operationalisation
RBI reorganises Weekly Statistical Supplement (