January 29, 2001
The Report on Currency and Finance for 1998-99 was for the first time designed to
focus on a single theme as a subject for detailed analysis. The comments received on that
report were generally favourable. Encouraged by this development the Report for 1999-2000
has been fashioned to set up a tradition of choosing a theme of critical contemporary value.
The objective of a theme based approach to direct intensive policy oriented research into
issues that emerge from the analytical treatment and empirical inquiry of the chosen theme,
and to place these analyses in the public domain so as to offer to the readership a
comprehensive, balanced and in-depth assessment of the subject against the background of
The 1990s have arguably been the decade of the financial sector for the Indian
economy. An integral element of financial sector reforms has been the gradual development
of financial markets. Policy interventions in market processes have been progressively
vacated to reap efficiency gains associated with the development of markets. But financial
development is only a necessary condition for sustainable growth, and by no means a
sufficient one. Financial stability has also to be given centre-stage in the designing of public
policy. In view of the criticality of the working of the financial sector for the Indian economy,
Financial Sector and Market Integration
As the theme in the last Report was devoted to ‘ Structural Transformation of the
Indian Economy ’ and the period covered was since the ‘eighties, a review of macro-economic
developments for the year 1998-99 was integrated into the theme itself. However, as the
theme of this year’s Report is focussed on financial sector and market integration, an
overview of the Indian economy during 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 (up to the latest available
Financial Sector reforms which have gained pace since mid-1991, have not only
facilitated growth and development of the Indian economy, but also helped to improve the
efficiency and integration of financial markets. These aspects have been highlighted in the
Report on Currency and Finance, 1999-2000 released by the Reserve Bank of India today.
Current macroeconomic and financial developments in the Indian economy highlight
the evolving role of the financial sector in the functioning of the economy and the growing
integration across financial markets. In view of the criticality of the working of the financial
sector for the Indian economy, the Report focuses on " Financial Sector and Market
" as its main theme, while providing an overall review of the recent economic
The Report analyses the issues relating to financial development, financial market
structure, financial integration and efficiency as also financial stability with reference to
India. The Report provides a broad spectrum of indicators to show that the Indian financial
system has become fairly deep over the last three decades or so. Among the two broad
sources of finance, viz., intermediaries-based and market-based, the relative importance of
the market-based finance has grown in the 1990s, even though the former continues to be the
Integration
developments.
http://www.rbi.org.in The Report is available on the RBI web site: 
period) precedes the analysis of the theme.
" as its main theme. the Report focuses on "
current times.
Market Efficiency and Integration
Financial Sector Reforms help improvemain source of financing. Evidence suggests that financial development and economic
growth reinforced each other.
It also discusses the various financial markets as it evolved during the ‘nineties. In a
market oriented economy, segmented markets could not only obscure the transmission of
public policies but could also give rise to sub-optimal allocation of resources. The data
India which remained segmented for
long are getting increasingly integrated both domestically and internationally, following
initiation of financial sector reforms in the 1990s. It also analyses integration of domestic
financial markets in terms of the linkages across the term structure of interest rates and
between interest rates and other asset prices. Cross-border integration is studied through
various indicators of openness to trade and finance as also the standard international parity
In order to ensure stability of the Indian financial sector, a wide array of measures has
been adopted. The Report analyses the prudential indicators of the financial system, policy
credibility and the policy response to achieve the requisite levels of transparency. The fiscal
policy issues having a bearing on the financial stability have also been examined. The Report
observes that the Indian financial system is reasonably stable with a median Capital to Risk-
weighted Asset Ratio (CRAR) exceeding 11.0 per cent for the nationalised as well as the
Indian private sector banks at the end of 1999-2000. However, high level of non performing
loans in some banks and some financial institutions and debilitated discipline in some 
is being addressed by the regulators putting in place a stricter supervision and regulatory
The Report examines financial sector efficiency, especially of the banking sector. It
observes that efficiency of both markets and institutions has improved following competitive
pressures resulting from deregulation of financial markets, advances in technology, blurring
of distinctions among providers of financial services and integration of markets. There is
some evidence that stock and foreign exchange markets in India are becoming
informationally more efficient. Presence of noise traders could adversely affect the market
efficiency; but the advances made in the electronic payment system are expected to
Reviewing the recent macroeconomic developments, the Report states that in 1999-
2000, the real GDP growth at 6.4 per cent equalled the average achieved in the 1990s
(excluding 1991-92, the year of adjustment). The growth performance of 1999-2000 occurred
in a stable environment. Financial markets in India remained generally stable during the year.
Different segments of financial markets exhibited a growing tendency towards integration
viewed in terms of the movements in prices and turnover. In the current financial year,
money market conditions were influenced by short-term developments in the currency market
and policy interventions of the Reserve Bank aimed at promoting stability. The recently
introduced liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has facilitated the maintenance of orderly
The Report is essentially a research document prepared by economists of the Reserve
1
Bank. The Reserve Bank would greatly appreciate comments and suggestions in this regard.
market conditions.
significantly lower transaction costs and improve efficiency.
system.
NBFCs
conditions.
presented in the Report indicate that financial markets in Release : 2000-2001/1085
2
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 