• The macro-economic, monetary and price situations and external sector
developments remained by and large favourable in 2000-01 despite the lower
performance of industry and some adverse developments in certain segments
of financial market.
• RBI to provide adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support revival of
investment demand.
• RBI expects the present stable interest rate environment to continue and
• Measures to reduce interest rates on export credit by 1 to 1.5 percentage points
and 
• Steps to move forward to the next stage of Liquidity Adjustment Facility:
wide-ranging package of measures including Back-stop Facility to banks and
• CRR made more flexible, interest on 
• 
• to offer higher interest on deposits held by Senior Citizens.
• 
• RBI 
• RBI to streamline its role by divesting ownership in financial institutions.
• Steps being taken to set a stage for separation of debt management function
• Revised guidelines on exposure of banks to stock markets to be effective May
2001 after further consultations.
Dr. Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, in a meeting with the Chief
Executives of banks today presented the annual Monetary and Credit Policy for 2001-
02.  The statement covered a review of macro-economic and monetary developments,
stance of monetary policy and wide- ranging package of measures to strengthen the
financial system and for development of markets and institutional infrastructure.
Governor also dealt with some analytical and practical issues concerning monetary
policy and exchange rate and reserves management.
2. At the outset, Governor pointed out that this year’s policy is being presented at
a time when serious lacunae have emerged in the functioning of certain segments of
the financial system.  In this connection, Governor mentioned that necessary remedial
measures urgently need to be taken to remove the weaknesses that have been noticed
sector  continues to remain strong and safe. so that India’s financial 
Bimal 
from RBI.
favours separate apex supervisory body for co-operative banks.
Prudential measures to strengthen Urban Co-operative Banks.
Banks allowed 
liberalised. PLR norms 
CRR balance increased.
PDs.
rationalise export credit refinance.
announces a preference for further softening during the year.
Highlights
Policy for the year 2001-2002
RBI Governor announces Monetary and Credit3. Governor mentioned that even though the immediate loss of production may
not be sizeable, the Gujarat earthquake has caused considerable damage and the cost
of restoration of infrastructure is expected to cause a fiscal strain on the state
reflecting loss of revenue and financing of relief and rehabilitation.   The Reserve
4. Governor said that GDP growth in 2000-01 is likely to be about 6.0 per cent as
compared with 6.4 per cent and 6.6 per cent in the previous two years. A welcome
feature of macroeconomic development last year was good performance of the
services sector, particularly of information technology related services.  The annual
rate of inflation was 4.9 per cent in 2000-01 as against 6.8 per cent a year ago.
Inflation as reflected in consumer price index (CPI) was much lower at 3.0 per cent
5. Referring to monetary developm ents, Governor noted that in 2000-01, the
annual growth in money supply (M ) on a point-to-point basis, was higher at 16.2 per
3
cent as against 14.6 per cent a year ago and captured large inflows amounting to about
,000 crore of India Millennium Deposits.   Aggregate deposits of the scheduled
commercial banks increased by 17.8 per cent as against 17.2 per cent in the previous
year.   For the year as a whole, non-food credit registered a lower growth of 14.3 per
6. The increase in reserve money during 2000-01 at 8.3 per cent (about
,200 crore) was comparable to that of 8.1 per cent (about Rs.21,000 
previous year.  The expansion in reserve money largely emanated from increase in net
7. Governor expressed concern over the large buffer stocks of foodgrains and
pointed out in this context the opportunity costs arising from fiscal and monetary
perspectives.  He welcomed the reforms in the management of the food economy
announced in the Union Budget 2001-02.
8. Governor felt that the containment of fiscal deficit in 2000-01 facilitated the
task of monetary and debt management as the market borrowing programme of the
central government  (Rs.1 ,15,183 crore gross and Rs.73,787 crore net) could be put
through without undue pressure on interest rates.
9. Governor welcomed the efforts towards fiscal consolidation including the
promise of Fiscal Responsibility Legislation and felt that coupled with lowering of
interest rates on contractual savings, these would facilitate a move towards a
favourable interest rate regime.  This should also help in releasing government
resources for much needed investment in physical and social infrastructure, which in
turn could stimulate private investment.
10. While highlighting the continuation of easy liquidity conditions and softer
interest rate environment, Governor emphasised that in case the present economic
circumstances change, it may again become necessary to take appropriate monetary
measures which may not be in consonance with the present easy conditions. He urged
the banks and financial institutions to make adequate allowance for unforeseen
2
foreign exchange assets.
crore) in the Rs.23
cent as against an increase of 16.5 per cent in the previous year.
Rs.26
upto end-February 2001.
Bank has already taken several initiatives to deal with the situation.
Domestic Developmentscontingencies in their business plans, and fully take into account the implications of
11. Dealing with certain practical aspects of monetary management, Governor
pointed out the difficulty in the correct assessment of the  inflationary
pressures based on the latest available data for the current period.   It, therefore,
becomes extremely important to appreciate the underlying inflation both from demand
and supply side factors before building up an appropriate policy stance. The Reserve
Bank will continue refinement in the methodology for assessment of the inflationary
outlook and a set of monetary indicators which could best guide the formulation of
monetary policy in a changing environment.
12. Governor mentioned that India’s  foreign currency assets increased by about
US $ 7.0 billion in the second half of 2000-01 and exchange rate movements were
generally orderly and range-bound, largely due to restoration of confidence in India’s
external prospects.
13. Governor drew the attention to the varied behaviour of the forex market,
sharply different during the two halves of the year, even though there was no
significant change in the ‘real’ economy or important economic variables, such as, the
An analysis of forex markets in two halves of the year 2000-2001 leads to following
• The day-to-day movements, in the short-run, in foreign exchange markets have
little to do with the so-called ‘fundamentals’ or country’s capacity to meet its
payments obligations, including debt service. Any adverse news, and
‘expectations’ generated by it tend to play a paramount role. Adverse expectations
are also generally self-fulfilling because of their adverse effect on “leads and lags”
• In view of inter-bank activity, which sets the pace in forex markets ,  transaction
volumes in “gross” terms are several times higher, and more variable, than “net”
flows. Exchange rates are more sensitive to “gross” flows, and variability in
• Any initial adverse movement, following bad news or unfavourable development
may get exacerbated because of greater inter-bank activity. Given the
“bandwagon” effect of any adverse movement and the herd behaviour of market
participants, the situation can lead to further buying or hedging activity among
non-bank participants. The “Daily Earnings At Risk”  (DEAR) strategies of risk
management tends to reinforce herd behaviour. There is a natural tendency to do
what everyone else is doing in the event of any adverse development rather than
taking a contra position, particularly in thin and underdeveloped markets
dominated by a few leading operators.
• Developing countries generally have smaller and localised forex markets where
nominal domestic currency values are expected to show a depreciating trend,
particularly if relative inflation rates are higher than those of major industrial
3
“gross” flows in turn is sensitive to exchange rate expectations.
in export/import receipts and payments, remittances and inter-bank positions.
observations : broad 
growth rate, trade deficit or oil prices.
External Developments
potential
changes in the monetary and external environment on their operations.countries.  In this situation, there is a greater tendency among market participants
to hold long positions in foreign currencies and to hold back sales when
expectations are adverse and currencies are depreciating, than the other way round
when currencies are appreciating and expectations are favourable. Thus, market
• The tendency of importers/exporters and other end-users to look at exchange rate
movements as a source of return without adopting appropriate risk management
strategies, at times, creates severe uneven supply-demand conditions, often based
on “news and views”.  A self-sustaining triangle of supply demand mismatch,
increased inter-bank activity to take advantage of it and accentuated volatility
triggered by negative sentiments, not in tune with fundamentals can be set in
14. Governor reiterated that eventhough in theory, there is a strong case for either
freely floating exchange rates (without intervention) or a currency board type
arrangement of fixed rates, in practice, however, most countries have some variety of
15. Governor stressed the importance of building up foreign exchange reserves to
take care of unforeseen contingencies, volatile capital flows and other 
which can affect expectations adversely. He maintained that these economic costs are
likely to be substantially higher than the net financial cost, if any, of holding reserves.
Governor reiterated that the overall approach to the management of India’s foreign
exchange reserves in recent years has reflected the changing composition of balance
of payments, and has endeavoured to reflect the “liquidity risks” associated with
different types of flows and other requirements. India’s foreign exchange reserves are
at 
16. He mentioned that the suggestions received from exporters and export trade
organisations were examined by RBI and the Bankers' Group and guidelines were
issued to banks to further simplify procedures for export credit.  Governor has
proposed to conduct a survey with the help of an independent outside agency  in order
to have a feedback on simplification of procedures by RBI for export credit delivery
17. Governor stated that for mitigating the problems of exporters due to the severe
earthquake, guidelines have been issued to banks for providing relief/concessions.
These include extending the period of packing credit, conversion of dues into short-
term loans repayable in suitable instalments and relaxation in NPA classification
18. Governor als o dealt with various steps taken recently to promote Foreign
Investment, such as foreign investment proposals in the IT sector, automatic approval
for general permission to Indian companies to receive funds and issue shares to their
foreign collaborators, improvement in the / GDR market and opportunity to
Indian shareholders to divest their shareholding, etc. Governor added that the
Reserve Bank will continue with its efforts to simplify procedure, reduce
documentation requirements and further  opportunities for productive
NRIs corporates abroad.
4
 and others and by Indian investment in India by 
liberalise
ADR
norms.
as also the level of exporters’ satisfaction with bank services.
present  comfortable, however, there can be no cause for complacency.
developments
“managed” floats and central banks intervene in the market periodically.
motion, requiring quick intervention/response by authorities.
behaviour is not symmetrical in both directions.19. Governor stated that during March 2001, considerable turbulence and
uncertainty in the equity markets led to problems in certain stock exchanges as well as
liquidity/insolvency problems in some co-operative banks, which in turn affected
certain commercial banks also.  An important priority of the Reserve Bank during this
difficult period was to try and minimise the “contagion” spreading from equity
markets to money and government securities markets or to the banking system as a
whole. Governor further stated that in the interest of financial stability, it is important
20. Governor mentioned that the impact of slow down in the world economy on
India may not be substantial.  A favourable factor this year is that the international
inflationary environment is reasonably benign. Governor expressed confidence that
though merchandise exports growth may slightly moderate, software exports with
more diversified destinations and private remittances may still be maintained. The
size of current account deficit is expected to continue to be well within 2.0 per cent of
GDP.
21. Governor, citing the lower fiscal deficit and contained borrowing 
mentioned that RBI expects to conduct debt management without serious pressure on
overall liquidity and interest rates.
22. Governor mentio ned that RBI will ensure that all legitimate requirements for
credit are met consistent with price stability. Towards this objective, the Reserve
Bank will continue its policy of active demand management of liquidity through
OMO, including two-way sale/purchase of Treasury Bills, and further reduction in
CRR as and when required. It should also be possible to maintain the current interest
rate environment, and explore the  possibility of some further softening in medium
and long-term rates. He cautioned however, that banks and financial institutions
should be prepared for a reversal or tightening, in case of unfavourable and
23. Governor indicated that for purposes of monetary policy formulation, for the
year as a whole, growth rate of real GDP may be placed at 6.0 to 6.5 per cent, the rate
of inflation to be  within 5.0 per cent and the projected expansion in broad money
) at about 14.5 per cent.  Non-food bank credit (adjusted for investments) is
3
projected to increase by 16.0 to 17.0 per cent which is expected to adequately meet
24. Regarding further flexibility of interest rates, he stressed that the financial
system should improve its operational efficiency and aim at further reductions in cost
of intermediation.  It is necessary for banks to undertake further improvements in
operational efficiency and active liability management for interest rate flexibility in
line with changes in the inflationary outlook.
25. In sum, under normal circumstances and barring emergence of any adverse
and unexpected developments in domestic or external sectors, the overall stance of
• Provision of adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support revival of
5
investment demand while continuing a vigil on movements in the price level.
monetary policy for 2001-02 will be:
the credit needs.
(M
unexpected developments.
programme,
to take measures to strengthen the regulatory framework for the co-operative sector.
II. Stance of Monetary Policy for 2001-02• Within the overall framework of imparting greater flexibility to the interest
rate regime in the medium-term, to continue the present stable interest rate
environment with a preference for softening to the extent the 
26. Governor announced certain structural measures to strengthen the financial
system and to improve the functioning of the various segments of financial markets.
Review of Liquidity Adjustment Facility - Stage II
27. On the basis of experience gained in operating LAF and after wide ranging
consultations and the general appreciation among the market participants that the first
LAF worked smoothly, it has been decided to move forward to implement the
second stage of 
Introduction of Back-stop Facility and
• It is proposed to split the standing liquidity facilities available from RBI into
two parts, viz., (
• 
• The Back-stop facility will be provided at a variable rate linked to reverse repo
rate/ repo rate/ NSE –
 
 repo bid was accepted, at 2.0 to 3.0 percentage points
over the 
 in case no bids were accepted at either repo or reverse repo auctions at
2.0 to 3.0 percentage points  over 
• Of the total limits of liquidity support available to PDs and banks, the normal
facility would initially constitute about two-thirds and the back-stop facility
28. Governor announced that the export refinance is rationalised to reflect more
closely the extent of total credit provided to exporters.  With effect from the fortnight
beginning May 5, 2001, scheduled commercial banks would be provided export credit
refinance to the extent of 15.0 per cent of the outstanding export credit eligible for
refinance. Banks will have the comfort that refinance on the basis of current formula
will set the minimum limit up to March 31, 2002.  This change in formula will benefit
an increase in the aggregate refinance. When 
volume of export credit increases, banks’ refinance eligibility will also
(b) Changes in 
29. The following measures relate to 
6
LAF operating procedures:
LAF Operating Procedures
correspondingly increase.
the a larger number of banks and besides 
about one-third.
NSE-MIBOR.
(iii)
repo cut-off rate;
where no reverse (ii)
repo cut-off rate; at 1.0 percentage point over the reverse  (i)
MIBOR:
The normal facility will be provided at the Bank Rate.
Back-stop facility. i) normal facility and  (ii) 
New Formula for Export Refinance
a) Changes in Standing Liquidity Facilities,
LAF.
stage of 
III. Financial Sector Reforms and Monetary Policy Measures
situation warrants.
evolving• crore to Rs.5 
• Timing is advanced by 30 minutes for receipt of bids and  announcement of
• Dissemination of information on the scheduled commercial banks’ aggregate
• An additional option to switchover to fixed rate repos which is expected to be
• repos 
• 
(c) 
30. Interest rate on export credit extended by banks rationalised and will be
indicated as a ceiling rate linked to PLR, so that the interest rate charged by the banks
can actually be lower than the prescribed rate. This is expected to introduce healthy
competition and provide exporters a greater choice to avail of banking services in
terms of interest rate, quality of service and transaction costs. Based on the current
PLR up to 180 days of major public sector banks, there is likely to be a reduction in
interest rate by 1.0 – 1.5 percentage points.  Banks can also offer lower than 
(d) Complementary Measures Associated with
31. The following complementary and associa ted measures in respect of money
( i
• Permission to corporates to route their call transactions through PDs would be
upto June 30, 2001.
• Access to other non-bank institutions (including financial institutions, mutual
funds and insurance companies) to operate in call/notice money market would
- In stage I, non-banks would be allowed to lend up to 85 per cent of their
- In stage II, with effect from the date of operationalisation of  Clearing
- In stage III, with effect from three months after stage II, access of non-
- In stage IV, with effect from three months after stage III, access of non-
banks to call/notice money market would be equivalent to 10.0 per cent.
• From a date to be notified by RBI, after the on-set of stage IV, non-banks will
not be permitted to lend in call/notice money market.  The above measures
7
banks to call/notice money market would be equivalent to 40.0 per cent; and
Corporation, non-banks would be allowed to lend up to 70.0 per cent;
average daily lending in call market during 2000-01. Similarly,
be gradually reduced in four stages:
available 
Call Money Market
)  Moving towards Pure Inter-bank
and government securities markets are announced:
Money and Government Securities Markets
minus 1.5 per cent rate for export finance.
PLR
Rationalisation of Interest Rates on Export Credit
price auction on an experimental basis. Introduction of multiple 
upto 14 days. RBI will also have the discretion to introduce longer-term 
sparingly used.
cash balances with RBI
results.
crore. Minimum bid size reduced from Rs.10 would allow sufficient time for market participants to adjust their portfolios
without any disruption in the market.
• It has been decided to reduce the minimum maturity period for term deposits
to 7 days from the present 15 days in respect of wholesale deposits of Rs.15
Cash Reserve Ratio Maintenance
• From the fortnight beginning August 11, 2001, the maintenance of daily
minimum CRR requirement of 65.0 per cent is reduced to  50.0 per cent for
the first seven  days of the  reporting fortnight; the minimum requirement of
65.0 per cent will be applicable to all the next seven days including the
(iv) Interest on Cash balances Maintained
• While the medium term objective will be to reduce CRR to the statutory
minimum, as an intermediate measure, interest rate on eligible balances will
be aligned with the Bank Rate in two stages.  From the fortnight beginning
April 21, 2001, the interest will be increased to 6.0 per cent.
(v
• The inter-bank term liabilities of maturity of 15 days and above are exempted
CRR requirement of 3.0 per cent.
• The present 14 day Treasury Bill and 182 day Treasury Bill auctions are to be
discontinued and the notified amount in the 91 day Treasury Bill auctions
increased to Rs.250 crore. 91 day and 364 day bills will become fungible
floating stocks to activate secondary market.
• In order that the market participants prepare themselves for the proposed
Negotiated Dealing System ( NDS), with effect from June 2, 2001, all
transactions settled through the Delivery versus Payment ( DVP) system of
to Prime Lending Rate
• Keeping in view the international practice and to provide further operational
flexibility to commercial banks in deciding their lending rates, it has been
8
(a) Review of Norms Relating
Interest Rate Policy
RBI will be on T plus 1 basis.
SGL Settled Transactions (vii) T plus 1 Settlement for 
Bill Market (vi) Treasury 
from the prescription of minimum 
Reserve Requirement
Liability from Minimum Cash
)  Exemption of Inter-bank Term
Cash Reserve Ratio
with Reserve Bank of India under
reporting Friday without any exception.
Requirement
(iii) Relaxation in Daily Minimum
lakh and above.
Period of Term Deposits
(ii) Shortening of Minimum Maturitydecided to relax the requirement of PLR being the floor rate for loans above
Rs.2 lakh.  PLR will serve as a bench mark and banks will be able to offer
loans at below- PLR rates to exporters or other creditworthy borrowers
including public enterprises on the lines of a transparent and objective policy
approved by their Boards.
• Banks are permitted to formulate fixed deposit schemes specifically meant for
senior citizens offering higher and fixed rates of interest as compared to
• Banks will be given freedom to exercise their discretion to disallow premature
withdrawal of large deposits held by entities other than individuals and Hindu
• Renewal of overdue deposits at the rate of interest prevailing on the date of
(d) Interest Rate on (B) Deposits
• The ceiling of LIBOR/Swap rate plus 50 basis points, revised  downward to
LIBOR/SWAP rates.
32. Following the announcement made in the Union Budget for 2001-02, a
Clearing Corporation and an electronic Negotiated Dealing System ( NDS) are
expected to be made operational and the Public Debt Act is proposed to be replaced
by the Government Securities Act.
• To promote retailing, individuals and Provident Funds will be allowed on non-
SDs.
• Uniform price auction format for auctions of dated securities, on a selective
Progress towards Separation of Debt Management
33.  Governor mentioned that though the separation of debt management from
monetary management function was recommended by a Working Group in 1997, its
implementation depended upon three pre-conditions viz. development of financial
markets, reasonable control over fiscal deficit and necessary legislative changes.
• the amendment to the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,  demarcating the
SEBI,
• the Finance Minister’s expression to accord greater operational flexibility to
• proposals from RBI for amendments to the RBI Act, the proposed Fiscal
9
Responsibility Bill to bring in reasonable control over the fiscal deficit,
the RBI for conduct of monetary policy,
regulatory roles of the RBI and 
Substantial progress has already been made on all the fronts such as,
and experimental basis.
PDs and competitive basis through 
Development of Government Securities Market
FCNR
maturity will be allowed only for an overdue period of 14 days.
Undivided Families.
(c) Term Deposits – Flexibility to Banks
normal deposits of any size.
(b) Deposit Schemes for Senior Citizens• the setting up of the Clearing Corporation and  the operation of the full-
Governor mentioned that once legislative actions are accomplished, it is
proposed to take up with the Government, the feasibility and further steps for
With a view to moving towards international best practices and to ensure
greater transparency, it has been decided to adopt the 90 days norm for recognition of
loan impairment, from the year ending March 31, 2004, but provisions will be
34. The asset of a financial institution would be treated as non-performing if
interest and/or principal remain overdue for 180 days instead of the present 365 days,
with effect from the year ending March 31, 2002.
(c) 
35. With effect from the year 2001-02, the audit firms recommended by Indian
private sector banks for appointment as their SCAs will have to satisfy the prescribed
standards such as minimum standing, minimum number of full time partners and
chartered accountants associated with the firm, etc.
(d) 
36. The revised guidelines for one time settlement  operative till March 31, 2001
were extended upto June 30, 2001; for processing these applications/cases, banks
upto September 30, 2001.
(e
• Exposure ceilings to be computed uniformly in relation to total capital as
defined under international capital adequate standards effective from March
31, 2002.
• Non-fund based exposures should be reckoned at 100 per cent and in addition,
banks should include forward contracts in foreign exchange and other
derivative products, effective from April 1, 2003.
• The exposure ceiling for single borrower adjusted from the existing 20 per
cent to 15 per cent effective from end-March 2002. Similarly, the group
37. Government has decided to set up 7 more Debt Recovery Tribunals (
during 2001-02 in addition to the existing 22 DRTs and 5 Appellate Tribunals to
facilitate banks to quickly recover their dues from borrowers.  Besides, the
10
DRTs)
(f) Debt Recovery Tribunals
exposure limits adjusted to 40 per cent of capital funds.
)  Method of Computation of Credit Exposure
have been given time 
NPAs Revised Guidelines for Recovery of 
in respect of Private Sector Banks
SCAs) Norms for Statutory Central Auditors (
(b) Prudential Norms for Financial Institutions
required to be made from March 31, 2002.
Recognition of Loan Impairment
(a) Adoption of 90 days Norm for
Prudential Measures
separation of debt management function of RBI.
fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility,Government has proposed to bring in legislation for facilitating foreclosure and
enforcement of securities in case of default so as to enable banks and financial
38. Pending appropriate amendments in banking laws, RBI has  advised banks to
incorporate a condition in the loan agreement for obtaining consent of the borrowers
to disclose their names in the event of their becoming defaulters. Banks, which have
not yet put in place the system of obtaining consent of the borrowers, are advised to
complete the process by September 30, 2001.
39. The report of the RBI- SEBI Technical Committee, which was submitted to
RBI on April 12, 2001 has been released and is available on RBI website.  The
Committee has taken into account the recent experiences of the banks and the
exposures taken by them by way of advances against shares and financial guarantees.
The Committee has found that the overall exposure of banks in capital markets (both
in terms of funded and non-funded credit facilities) continues to be modest, but some
relatively small banks (in terms of their share in total advances) do not seem to have
observed appropriate risk management guidelines, particularly in respect of advances
against shares and non-funded guarantees to a few stock  entities (including
their associated and inter-connected companies).  This concentration of exposure on a
few entities by these few banks was unjustified on prudential grounds and
substantially increased the risks attached to such advances/guarantees, besides raising
40. The Technical Committee’s recommendations are exp ected to minimise the
possibility of unwarranted and unethical “nexus” emerging between some inter-
connected stock broking entities and promoters/managers of some private sector or
co-operative banks.  In the light of the recommendations of the Technical Committee,
RBI proposes to revise the guidelines issued earlier in November 2000 on banks’
investments in shares as also advances against shares and other connected exposures
and issue the final guidelines in early May 2001 after taking into account further
(
41. A recent assessment has indicated that some of the banks have taken concrete
steps in building core deposit base, arranging committed lines of credit, etc., in order
to reduce their dependence on call money borrowings.  If, however, any bank
continues to rely excessively on call money market for carrying out their banking
operations, after discussion with such bank, RBI will lay down specific ceilings to
( i) Dematerialised holding
42. It has been decided that with effect from June 30, 2001, banks, FIs, PDs and
SDs will be permitted to make fresh investments and hold CP only in dematerialised
form and outstanding investments in scrip form should also be converted into 
11
demat
Preference for 
(j) Commercial Paper
reduce its long-term dependence on call money.
i) Reliance on Call Money Market
comments/suggestions.
serious ethical concerns.
broking
of banks to Stock Market
(h) Revised Guidelines on Exposure
(g) Defaulters’ List – Widening the Coverage
institutions to realise their dues.by October, 2001. As a corollary, it is also considered expedient to extend the 
form of holding to other investments like bonds, debentures and equities.
Accordingly, with effect from October 31, 2001 banks, FIs, PDs and SDs will be
permitted to make fresh investments and hold bonds and debentures, privately placed
or otherwise, only in dematerialised form and outstanding investments also should be
converted into 
43. As part of the new guidelines on issue of CP released in October 2000, Fixed
Income Money Market and Derivatives Association ( FIMMDA) was entrusted with
the task of prescribing standard procedures and documentations. FIMMDA would
circulate a draft of these guidelines among its members and other market participants.
(k) New 
44. In RBI, an internal Working Group is currently examining the implications of
)  Consolidated Accounting and Supervision
45. A multi-disciplinary Working Group has been set up to look into the
introduction of consolidated accounting and quantitative techniques for consolidated
supervision, in line with international best practices. The Group is expected to submit
(m) Move towards Risk-based Supervision ( RBS)
46. Following the recommendations of an international consultant appointed to
advise a proper structuring  of the RBS approach, a dedicated Group has been set up
(n) Credit Information Bureau
47. While Credit Information Bureau ( CIB) can be functional within the existing
framework, to strengthen the legal mechanism for making the functioning of 
effective, a draft  legislation covering responsibilities of the Bureau, rights and
obligations of the member credit institutions, safeguarding of the privacy rights, has
(o) Prompt Corrective Action
48. A framework for Prompt Corrective Action ( PCA) was prepared with various
trigger points for prompt responses by the supervisors and based on the suggestions
received, the scheme has been modified. The scheme will be finalised in consultation
with banks and the Government.
49. An Inter-Departmental Group was constituted and a pilot review of MPIs for
the half-year ended March 2000 was finalised and a review for September 2000 has
since been prepared.
UCBs)
12
Urban Co-operative Banks (
(p) Macro-Prudential Indicators
been forwarded to Government of India.
CIB
within  RBI  for project implementation.
its report before July 2001.
(l
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. the new Accord released by the 
Basel Capital Accord
(ii) Documentation and Procedure
demat by June, 2002.
demat(
50. In order to strengthen prudential measures for urban co-operative banks ,  in
the interest of their members and depositors, the following measures are proposed:
• With immediate effect, UCBs are being advised not to entertain any fresh
proposals for lending directly or indirectly against security of shares either to
individuals or any other entity. They are also advised to unwind existing
lending to 
• Their borrowings in the call/notice money market on a daily basis should not
exceed 2.0 per cent of their aggregate deposits as at end March of the previous
financial year.
• As a safety precaution, UCBs are advised not to increase their term deposits
with other 
• The proportion of SLR required to be held in the form of government and
other approved securities as percentage of NDTL being increased for all
categories of UCBs.  With effect from April 1, 2003, the scheduled UCBs will
need to maintain their entire SLR assets of 25.0 per cent of NDTL only in
• All scheduled and large UCBs to maintain investments in government
securities only in SGL Accounts with RBI or in constituent SGL Accounts of
PDs.
51. All these measures are either ‘prospective’ in nature or sufficient time has
52. In the light of the recent experience, one of the opti ons that deserves to be
seriously considered is the setting up of a new apex supervisory body which can take
over the entire inspection/supervisory functions in relation to scheduled and non-
scheduled UCBs. This apex body could be under the control of a separate high-level
supervisory board consisting of representatives of the Central Government, State
Governments, RBI as well as experts and it may be given the responsibility of
inspection/and supervision of  and ensuring their conformity with prudential,
53. RBI has accepted the recommendations of Narasimham Committee II for
transfer of ownership of its shares in SBI, NHB and NABARD to the Central
Government, and is in touch with the Government in this regard.  RBI also plans to
initiate the process in respect of IDFC at an appropriate time in future.  In respect of
DICGC, RBI had  submitted proposals to the Government for framing a new Act to
make it consistent with financial sector liberalisation. In respect of DFHI and STCI, it
13
UCBs?
Credit Delivery Mechanism
has been decided to completely divest shareholdings in the current year.
Ownership Functions of the Reserve Bank of India
capital adequacy and risk-management norms laid down by RBI.
UCBs
(ii) A New Supervisory Structure for 
been allowed to implement them in the interest of their members.
public sector banks and 
government and other approved securities.
UCBs.
stock-brokers or direct investment in shares, at the earliest.
i) Prudential Measures54. As relief towards Gujarat, a large number of measures have been taken.  These
inter alia
• Interest rate on loans at SBI.
• Relief/concessions for affected exporters by extending the period of packing
credit, conversion of dues into short-term loans repayable in suitable
• In respect of agricultural loans, banks are not to recover principal or interest
with  a provision for reschedulement  
• Provision of additional limits/rescheduling of existing limits for 
• RBI has sanctioned a long-term loan of Rs.1 ,000 crore at 6.0 per cent rate of
interest per annum to enable National Housing Bank provide refinance
55. NBFCs are advised to repay public deposits as per the terms of their
acceptance and continue to adhere to the provisions of RBI Act and other directives
issued from time to time.  NBFCs should submit the returns as prescribed by RBI at
CoR has been rejected.
56. The Government has proposed a separate legislation to provide for enhanced
NBFCs. The Bill is under consideration  of the
Government.
Upgradation
(a) Payments System Vision Document
57. The Reserve Bank is examining comments/feedback received and the final
Cheque  Truncation
58. A Working Group constituted by the Ministry of Finance , Government of
India is examining the legal requirements for cheque truncation under the Negotiable
Instruments Act.
(c) 
59. Based on the levels of technology usage in different banks ,  staggered
approach is being prepared covering the introduction of settlement of internet based
transactions in a highly secured environment with appropriate risk control measures
14
and risk management techniques.
Internet  Banking
for 
(b) ‘Imaging’ as Pre-cursor
version of the Vision Document would be published shortly.
Technology 
protection to the depositors covered by 
periodical intervals even if the application for granting 
Non-Banking Financial Companies
assistance for reconstruction.
SSI), business, trade and industry. Small Scale Industries (
affected
upto 7 years. for a period of two years 
NPA classification norms. instalments and relaxation in 
PLR of the 
 include:
Gujarat Relief Measures for 60. RBI has forwarded its recommendations to Government of India for
comprehensive amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, which are under consideration by the Government.
Government of India has constituted a Working Group for suggesting changes in the
provisions of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, to bring it in conformity with the
Information Technology Act, 2000.  A Bill on asset securitisation for enactment has
been drafted and submitted to the Government.
61. Reports of the seven Advisory Groups have been put on the RBI website for
debate and discussion.  Three more reports are expected by May 2001. The Standing
Committee also plans to help the Groups in organising Seminars/Workshops to
enhance awareness and concretise views on the recommendations and seek
comments/feedback from both private and public sector organisations, international
institutions and experts.
62. ough the  has ceased its operations, in view of the  response
to the Scheme, RBI has decided to make the review exercise an integral part of its
internal system and accordingly, has put in place an alternate mechanism under the
charge of an Executive Director for dealing with such applications from April 1,
2001.
63. A review of credit and monetary developments in the first half of the current
year will be undertaken in October 2001.
Release : 2000-2001/1433
15
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
Mid-term Review
favourable RRA Th
Regulations Review Authority
International Financial Standards and Codes
Legal Reforms