June 6, 2001
The Advisory Group on Banking Supervision has recommended that the Reserve
Bank of India may urgently consider the desirability of introducing and participating in a
scheme of formalised coordination between different regulators. It has also recommended
designation of one of the regulators involved as a primary regulator and coordinator with
The Advisory Group was set up by the Standing Committee on International Financial
Standards and Codes. The Standing Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y. V. Reddy,
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India with Secretary (Economic Affairs) Government of
India as Alternate Chairman had set up ten such advisory groups in order to identify and
monitor developments in global standards and codes in different subject areas, consider
aspects of applicability of these standards to Indian financial system, periodically review the
status.
The Advisory Group on Banking Supervision had Shri M. S. Verma, Chairman,
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India as the chairman with S/Shri Janki Ballabh, Chairman,
State Bank of India, K. R. Ramamoorthy, Chairman, Vysya Bank and H. N. Sinor, Managing
 Study of the present status of applicability and relevance as well as compliance in
 Study of the feasibility of compliance and the timeframe within which this can be
 Comparing the levels of adherence in India vis-à-vis industrialised countries and also
emerging economies particularly to understand India’s position and to prioritise action
 
The first part of the Report was submitted in September 2000. The Report covered
areas relating to corporate governance, bank transparency, supervision of cross-border
banking and banks’ internal rating systems. In its final report, submitted on May 29, 2001,
the Group has assessed the level of compliance in India vis-à-vis the principles/ standards
detailed in the 16 papers on the subject of banking regulation and supervision brought out by
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision of the Bank for International Settlements. The
(a) 
 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
 
(g) 
While making its assessment in regard to the Indian position, the Group has
concluded that given the level of complexity and development of Indian banking sector, the
level of compliance with the standards and codes is of a high order. It has, however, pointed
out a number of areas in which improvements are called for. In the areas of corporate
Cross-border Banking
Financial Conglomerates (f)
Loan Accounting, transparency and disclosures
Management of Credit Risk
Internal Control
Corporate Governance (b)
Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision
Group’s assessment has been categorised under the following headings:
Chalking out a course of action for achieving the best practices. (iv)
on some of the more important codes and standards; and
(iii)
achieved, given the prevailing legal and institutional practices in India;
(ii)
India of the relevant standards and codes;
(i)
The broad framework for the working of the Group included:
Director, ICICI Bank as members.
clearly assigned roles and responsibilities.
Final Report of Advisory Group on Banking Supervision releasedgovernance, internal control and management of risks, the Group has looked hard at the
present practices and found certain urgent changes to be necessary.  The most important
recommendation in respect of corporate governance relates to the constitution of the boards
and their accountability. In regard to the risk management, the Group has concluded that the
current situation calls for greater orientation of the banks’ management and their boards
towards a better understanding of the risks and their management.  In the opinion of the
Group, the banks are handicapped in implementing a reliable credit rating and other risk
management systems due to (a) lack of qualified personnel, (b) absence of reliable high
frequency historical data, and (c) lack of proper appreciation of risks management concepts at
the middle and senior management levels.  Similarly, in regard to loan accounting and credit
risk management, the Group has recommended that the formulae based system of
classification and provisioning should give way to a more closer to reality assessment of the
For the purpose of providing an integrated view, the earlier report has been merged
with the present Report. In accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing
Committee, it has been decided to make these reports available to the public for wider
discussion. The full text of the Report of the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision has
www.rbi.org.in
2
Press Release No.2000-2001/1649
General Manager
Alpana Killawala
been placed on the RBI website 
realisability of assets, relying on a risk-assessment based system.