January 24, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers is the research journal of the Bank.  It
contains contributions of the Bank’s staff and reflects the views of the authors.  The 
2000 issue is being released today.  This issue is devoted to the theme of Issues in Finance.  It
The first article entitled “Financial Stability: A Survey of the Indian Experience”, by
Michael Debabrata Patra and Sunando Roy, undertakes an assessment of the Indian
experience with establishing financial stability.  It finds that a distinct country specific flavour
in the approach to the responsibility for financial stability has produced encouraging results in
terms of the adaptation responses of financial institutions, particularly banks, to structural
The second paper entitled “Stock Returns and Volatility in India: An Empirical
”, by Sitikantha Pattanaik and Bhaskar Chatterjee, turns to the financial markets.  It
examines the behaviour of equity premiums in the capital market in India.  The empirical
results suggest that although long-term investors are compensated for the systematic risk they
bear for holding equity, the expected risk-return relationship breaks down in the short to
medium-term.  The dominance of short horizon players and associated volatility in the equity
The third paper entitled “Short-term Interest Rates and Real Economic Activity”, by
Sarat  , applies the technique of rolling regression in a single equation
framework, as well as a multi  estimation in a vector  model to
demonstrate that the impact of short-run movements in nominal interest rates in India have
In the review articles section, the paper entitled “Financial Stability and Public Policy:
An Overview”, by Saibal Ghosh, reviews the sources of financial market failure and assesses
game theoretic explanations for financial instability and the role of official incentives,
regulation and transparency in minimising the cost of instability.  Dhritidyuti Bose and Partha
Ray present a narrative evaluation of the changes in the methodological approach to the
measurement of household financial saving in India in their paper entitled “Measurement of
Household Financial Saving in India: A History of the Methodological Evolution”. It
discusses existing methodological impediments and future directions in improving the
compilation of financial saving in India.  B.K.Bhoi reviews the first wave of mergers and
acquisitions in India which is currently occurring in the corporate sector in his review article
“Mergers and Acquisitions: An Indian Experience”.  Suddhasattwa Ghosh’s note entitled
“Design Issues in Micro Credit” takes a close look at a major macro credit provider in India
Y. Kalyanraman reviews the book “ Exchange Rates and the Firm ”, by Richard
Friberg, Macmillan Press Ltd., 1999 and Ms. Vidya Pitre reviews Prof. T. N. 
Eight Lectures on India’s Economic Reforms ” brought out as a book by Oxford University
Press in 2000.
www.rbi.org.in
P. V. Sadanandan
Release : 2000-2001/1065
by undertaking a primary level study based on the questionnaire-cum-interview method.
Press 
. Manager Asstt
website The publication is also available on RBI 
“
Srinivasan’s
become relatively stronger than the impact of changes in liquidity on real activity.
autoregression variate
Dhal Chandra
market obscures a proper assessment of the cost of equity capital.
Puzzle?
shifts in the macroeconomic and financial environment.
contain, three articles, two review articles, two special notes and two book reviews.
Summer
Papers : Summer 2000 Issue Reserve Bank of India Occasional 