January 6, 2001
" We have the comparative advantage, we have the resources, we have the manpower and
we also have the respect of the world to make our financial system the best in the world.
But the task is not easy."  Stating this Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India
appealed to the National Institute for Bank Management and the banking community to
debate and come up with a blueprint for the future of the banking system in India in say,
another 10-15 years.  The Governor was addressing chief executives of commercial
banks on the occasion of the Annual Day function of the National Institute of 
The Governor pointed out that it is possible to make the Indian banking system the best
even if it retained its public sector character.  Citing examples of other central banks,
such as, Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and the Bank of England, the Governor
stated that though these were publicly  owned, they were able to deliver their mandate as
the instrumentalities through which they would achieve these objectives were completely
left to them once their choice of objectives was made.  Autonomy and  independence
along with clearly stated objectives were important in this regard.
The Governor further stated that the public sector character of the banking system had
certain advantages.  It has made it less vulnerable , it has also given it a wide reach and
given it an established institutional structure.  It has, however, also brought along some
costs, such as, rigidity, inability to respond quickly to changing environment and
constraints on the human resources front, he added and urged that the Indian banking
system must strive to reduce the disadvantages and to 
The Governor pointed out that issues such as, meeting international standards on capital
adequacy, transparency, disclosures and technology were no longer a matter of choice if
the Indian banking system wanted to be globally competitive. Stating that the Reserve
Bank had taken several initiatives on  introducing greater transparency in the Indian
financial system, he added that it was equally important for the banks to put in strong
internal controls and asset-liability management systems in place.  He pointed out  that in
a more competitive, cost efficient, transparent environment, the Indian banking system
may lose out if it was not able to withstand the scrutiny of international analysts who
evaluated the banking systems globally on internationally prescribed standards.
According to the Governor, meeting  global standards of prudential  norms, transparency
and disclosure norms, reduction of non-performing assets, infusing technology to bring in
more efficiency in terms of time and costs in banking transactions and relooking  at the
system of recruitment, promotion and rewards to get the best out of the human resources
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
are some of the challenges faced by the banking industry today.
maximise the benefits.
Pune today. Management held in 
Bank
exhorts Indian Financial System
Aim at being the best: RBI GovernorRelease : 2000-2001/982
Press 