RBI reconstitutes Technical Advisory Committee
on Money and Government Securities Markets
September 22, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India has decided to reconstitute the Technical Advisory
Committee on Money and Government Securities markets for a further term of two years
from the day of its first meeting.  The Committee would advise the Reserve Bank, on an
ongoing basis, on the development of a healthy and vibrant money and Government
securities markets.
The composition of the reconstituted Technical Advisory Committee on Money
and Government Securities markets is:
Chairman
1. Dr. Y.V. Reddy
Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of India
Permanent Invitees
2. Shri G.P. Muniappan
Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of India
3. Shri Vepa Kamesam
Deputy Governor
Reserve Bank of India
4. Shri Mohd. Tahir
Executive Director (In-charge of Internal Debt Management Cell)
Reserve Bank of India
5. Executive Director (In-charge of Monetary Policy Department)
Reserve Bank of India
6. Shri Rakesh Mohan
Adviser to the Finance Minister
Ministry of Finance
Members
7. Dr. Shankar Acharya
New Delhi.
8. Shri Rajendra Asthana
Deputy Managing Director and Chief Financial Officer
State Bank of India
9. Shri P.V. Narasimham
Chief Executive Officer
Industrial Finance Corporation of India
10. Shri Roderick RichardsSenior Country Executive
American Express Bank
11. Dr. Nachiket Mor
Executive Director
ICICI Bank
12. Shri Aditya Puri
Managing Director
HDFC Bank Ltd.
13. Shri D.N.Ghosh
Chairman
Investment and Credit Rating Agency
14. Shri Suman Bery
Director General
National Council for Applied Economic Research
15. Shri Ravi Narain
Managing Director
National Stock Exchange
16. Shri R.V. Joshi
Managing Director
Securities Trading Corporation of India
Special Invitee
17. Chairman/Managing Director
Clearing Corporation of India Ltd.
Secretaries
18. Smt. Usha Thorat
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Internal Debt Management Cell
19. Shri K. Kanagasabapathy
Adviser-in-Charge
Monetary Policy Department
Reserve Bank of India
Terms of reference of the Committee are:
(i) to review and recommend measures for deepening and widening the money and
Government securities markets including those relating to participants, products,
institutional and infrastructural arrangements etc.;
(ii) to suggest measures for development of secondary market and promoting liquidity
in money market instruments and Government securities;
(iii) to examine and advise on the evolving and desirable linkages among the money,
Government securities, foreign exchange and capital markets;
(iv) to review the infrastructure, legal and institutional arrangements for trading,
transfer and settlement in the money and Government securities markets in the
context of the emerging payments system including CCIL;(v) to prepare and consider papers on topics relating to product/market development
and advise on the policies and practices for the same;
(vi) to review the qualitative and quantitative aspects of risk management, accounting,
disclosure, settlement, legal framework etc. in the money and Government
securities markets and render advise, and
(vii) to examine any other relevant issue having a bearing on these markets referred to
it, by the Reserve Bank.
The Committee could appoint technical groups consisting of its own members
and/or outside experts to study and submit recommendations on specific issues, if
necessary.  The Committee will meet as often as it is required, but at least once in a
quarter and will function for two years from the date of its first meeting.
It may be recalled that two committees, viz., Technical Committee on
Government Securities Market and Standing Committee on Money Market were
constituted in January and April 1997, respectively, under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.V.
Reddy, Deputy Governor. Set up to examine various issues relating to money and
securities markets and render suggestions, members for these committees were drawn
from banks, financial services and academic/research institutions. In view of the
increasing integration of these markets and commonality in the matters dealt with by the
two Committees, these Committees were subsequently merged into a 'Technical Advisory
Committee on Money and Government Securities Markets' with Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy
Governor as Chairman. The Technical Advisory Committee on Money and Government
Securities Markets was set up on July 12, 1999 for a period of two years. The Committee
has been crystallising the synergies of experts across various fields of the financial
market and acting as a facilitator for the Reserve Bank in steering reforms in money and
Government securities markets. It has, therefore, been decided to reconstitute the
Committee.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2001-2002/368