Working Group to review the existing norms
for the empanelment of statutory auditors,
for public sector banks
Keeping in view the changes in financial sector in general and banking in particular, the
Reserve Bank of India has decided to revise the existing norms for empanelment of
statutory auditors, appointment of statutory central auditors for public sector banks as
well as other related matters thereto. For this purpose, a Working Group has been
constituted with the following:
1. Shri C.R. Muralidharan, Convener
Chief General Manager,  Department of Banking &
Operations, Central Office, RBI, Mumbai.
2. Dr. K.B.L. Mathur Member
Economic Adviser, Banking Division, MoF, GoI, N Delhi
3. Shri  A.K. Awasthi, Member
Principal Director (Commercial) Office of the Comptroller
&  Auditor General of India, New Delhi
4. Shri S.L. Daga, Member
Chairman, Professional Development Committee,
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, New Delhi
5. Shri B.D. Sumitra, Member
Chief General Manager (Accounts & Compliance)
State Bank of India , Central Office, Mumbai
6. Shri C.P. Swarankar, Member
General Manager, Punjab National Bank, Head Office,
New Delhi
7. Shri V. Santhana Raman, Member
General Manager, Indian Bank, Head Office,
Chennai
8. Shri  K. Unni Krishnan Member
Executive -  Banking Operations, Indian Banks'
Association, Mumbai
9. Shri R.M. Thakkar, Member-
DGM, Department of Banking Supervision, Central Office, Secretary
RBI, Mumbai.The terms of reference of the Working Group are:
(i) To review the existing norms for empanelment of statutory central auditors
(SCAs) of public sector banks / 7 all India financial institutions and RBI.
(ii)  To review the number of audit firms that are presently allotted to each public
sector bank in a team o statutory central auditors.
(iii) To review existing marking system adopted by RBI for fixing inter se seniority of
new audit firms (appearing in the panel received from the Office of C & AG
every year) for the purpose of assigning statutory central audit.
(iv) To review the existing  ratio 9 :1 in which available vacancies of SCAs in public
sector banks / 7 all India financial institutions and RBI are filled in, every year,
out of experienced and new audit firms.
(v) To review the existing categories / norms prescribed by RBI for determining inter
se seniority of the audit firms applying to ICAI for the purpose of their
empanelment as branch auditors for public sector banks.
(vi) To review the existing position on reckoning the audit experience of Jammu &
Kashmir Bank Ltd.  gained by audit firms.
(vii) Any other matters which the Working Group may consider relevant to the above
issues.
The Working Group is expected to submit its report within a period of two months.
At present the list of statutory auditors for public sector banks is prepared out of the panel
submitted by Comptroller & Auditor General of India and Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India, every year, based on the norms prescribed by the Reserve Bank of
India.
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press release No.2001-2002/729