August 2, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue banknotes in the denomination of Rs.20 in
Salient 
The size of this Rs.20/- note has been retained at 147mm (Length) x 63mm (Width). The
Ashoka Pillar watermark has been substituted with a portrait of Mahatma Gandhi with light
and shade effect. The watermark window will have multi-directional lines. A security thread
has been totally embedded inside the note with the letters " ¸¸£÷¸ " and " RBI". The design,
The note has been printed with a combination of offset and intaglio processes. The colour
scheme of this note is predominantly reddish orange. The Ashoka Pillar has been replaced by
the Mahatma Gandhi portrait in dark red and the Ashoka Pillar has been shifted and printed in
a smaller size on the left side bottom corner of  the note . The note will bear the Reserve
Bank of India seal and the signature of Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor of Reserve Bank of India.
The numeral 20, RBI seal, Mahatma Gandhi's portrait, RBI legend, guarantee and promise
clauses, Governor's signature and Ashoka Pillar inset are printed by intaglio process. These
features would be in a raised form on the note. The words " RBI" and the numeral "20" in
micro letters appear alternatively behind the Mahatma Gandhi portrait. An identification
feature by way of a small vertical rectangle in raised form appearing on the left of the note
above the Ashoka Pillar has been introduced in this note to assist the visually impaired to
The numbering is done on the front with red ink. The numbering panel has 'A' inset on both
left hand bottom and right hand top corner of the note.
BACK
The central theme depicts the Indian coastal line with coconut grooves. The value of the note
appears in 15 languages in a vertical panel on the 
The Rs.20 notes issued earlier by the Bank and which are in circulation will continue to be
Release : 2001-2002/140
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
legal tender.
left hand side.
identify the denomination.
FRONT
colour scheme and other security features of this note are as follows:
Features :
the Mahatma Gandhi series bearing the Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the watermark.
RBI to issue new Rs.20/- notes in Mahatma Gandhi Series