May 11, 2001
In pursuance of the announcement made in October ,  2000 in the Mid-term Review of
the Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2000-2001, the RBI-SEBI Technical Committee
had reviewed the RBI guidelines set out in circular dated November 10, 2000 on banks’
investment in shares as also advances against shares and other connected exposures. Based on
the feed back received from banks and market participants on the recommendations made by
the Technical Committee and the draft amendments proposed to the earlier guidelines,
Reserve Bank of India has issued today the revised guidelines on banks’ investment in shares
and financing of equities. The revised guidelines will come into effect from May 11, 2001.
Keeping in view the basic features as indicated in circular dated November 10, 2000,
the following changes have been made in the revised guidelines in the light of recent
( Market :
The ceiling of 5% prescribed in the November 2000 guidelines on investments in
capital market will continue but will also now apply to total exposure of a bank to stock
markets (including loans / advances to individuals / corporates and stockbrokers for
investment in shares / debentures etc.). It is clarified that the ceiling will not apply to shares /
convertible debentures etc. assigned to the banks as collateral by individuals / corporates for
availing of banks credit for carrying out normal trade / production / investment or other
developmental activities (which do not involve stock- broking or investment in capital
markets).
(ii) stockbroking entities :
    Recognising the nexus that has been observed among a few participants in stock markets, it
has been proposed that each bank should fix, within the overall ceiling of 5%, a sub-ceiling
advances to-
(a) 
(b) 
(iii) 
The existing instructions in regard to advances to individuals and financing of 
(iv) 
A measure of simplification and rationalization, of margins prescribed has been
introduced. Thus, as against the existing stipulation regarding minimum cash margin of 25%
for issue of guarantees, 25% margin for advances against demat shares and 50% for advances
against physical shares, a uniform margin of 40% on all advances / guarantees with a
minimum cash margin of 20% ( within the margin of 40% ) in respect of guarantees issued by
banks has been proposed.
IPOs
 Financing of arbitrage operations (v)
Margins :
remain unchanged (except in regard to margins).
individuals : Advances to 
stockbroking entities, its associate / interconnected companies to individual 
all the stock brokers and market makers (both fund based and non fund based) and,
for total 
Avoidance of concentration to a few 
Ceiling on Overall Exposure to Capital i) 
developments :
(Revised Guidelines)
Bank financing of Equities and Investments in SharesStray cases of questionable operations of banks’ investments in secondary markets
were also noticed warranting a clear enunciation of policy on arbitrage operations. Hence, the
stipulations :
(a) Banks should not undertake arbitrage operations themselves or extend credit
(b) While banks are permitted to acquire shares from the secondary market, they
should ensure that no sale transaction is undertaken without actually holding the shares in its
investment account.
As a further safeguard to prevent any nexus from emerging, the revised guidelines
emphasise that there should be clear separation of decision making in regard to investments
in shares / advances against shares, which will be done by the Investment Committee, to be
set up by the Board. The surveillance and monitoring of investments / advances against
shares have to be done by the separate and independent Audit Committee of the Board which
will review the total exposure of the bank to capital market, both fund based and non fund
based, in all forms. The Audit Committee should ensure that the guidelines issued by RBI,
and the Board of the bank are complied with, and adequate risk management and internal
The revised guidelines include certain “transitional provisions” in order to ensure
smooth transition to the new rules and to provide sufficient time to banks to adjust their
Release : 2000-2001/1538
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
website. The detailed guidelines are annexed and have also been placed on the RBI 
portfolio of investment in shares and advances / guarantees against shares.
Transitional provisions (vii) 
control systems are in place.
functions : Segregation of responsibilities relating to investment and surveillance (vi) 
facilities directly or indirectly to stockbrokers for arbitrage operations in Stock Exchanges.
revised guidelines make the following 