Advisory Group on “Data Dissemination”
May 30, 2001
It may be recalled that Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and
Codes was constituted in December 1999 under the Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India with  Secretary (Economic Affairs), Government of India
as Alternate Chairman in order to identify and monitor developments in global standards and
codes, consider aspects of applicability of these standards to Indian financial system,
periodically review the status and make available its Reports to all  concerned 
in public or private sector.
          The said Standing Committee constituted ten Advisory Groups consisting of experts in
different subject areas. The Advisory Group on “Data Dissemination” under the
Chairmanship of Dr. A.Vaidyanathan (vice Late Dr. Pravin Visaria) with Dr. 
Director, EPW Research Foundation, Dr. Ajay Shah, Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of the
Development Research as Members and Dr. A.C. Kulshreshtha as Special Invitee from
Central Statistical Organisation, Government of India submitted  its Report to the Standing
Committee on May 23, 2001.
  In accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, it has been
decided to make these Reports available to the public for wider discussion.  The full text of
the Report of the Advisory Groups on “Data Dissemination” has been placed on the RBI
The Group has  endorsed the rationale behind Special Data Dissemination Standards
(SDDS) and its usefulness in ensuring smooth and healthy functioning of the financial system
both nationally and internationally.  According to the Group, India is already fully compliant
in respect of practically all items in the SDDS. The Advisory Group observed that in case of
international reserves and foreign currency liquidity, many countries do not give all the
information as per new data template. The Group observed that the data on foreign exchange
reserves and forward liabilities put out by India under the template compares favourably with
many other countries. Therefore, the Group suggested that a view has to be taken for
disclosing sensitive information based on the disclosure of information as practiced by many
other developing countries, in the background of country’s market depth and development.
Besides, the Group felt that dissemination arrangements under SDDS would have to be
strengthened with hyper-links between various data sources in India and IMF’s electronic
bulletin board. Also the Group made a separate set of recommendations to improve the
general standard of dissemination of India’s financial sector statistics although the issue was
The recommendations contained in this Report are the product of independent
evaluation and assessment of standards and codes undertaken by non-official experts, and do
not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank, or the Government of India or any other concerned
Release : 2000-01/1621
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
regulatory agencies.
outside the purview of terms of reference.
www.rbi.org.in Website 
S.L.Shetty,
organisations
 Report released