RBI sets up Consultative Group to strengthen Supervisory Role of Bank Boards
November 27, 2001
In consultation with the Indian Banks' Association the Reserve Bank of India has constituted a
consultative group to strengthen supervisory role of bank boards.  The Group would have the
following members :
Chairman :
Dr. A.S. Ganguly, Director, Central Board, RBI.
Members  :
(i) Dr. J.L. Saha, Director, IIM, Ahmedabad,
(ii) Shri Tarun Das, New Delhi, (Former Director, IDBI),
(iii) Shri Janki Ballabh, Chairman, State Bank of India,
(iv) Shri D. Satwalekar, Director, HDFC Bank Ltd.,
(v) Shri S.C. Wadhwa, Director, Dena Bank.
(vi) Shri P.V. Indiresan, Director, Indian Bank,
(vii) Shri Shailendra Swarup, Director, Corporation Bank,
(viii) Shri P.R. Khanna, Director, State Bank of India,
(ix) Shri S.K. Munjal, Director, Bank of India,
(x) Executive Director, RBI (in-charge of DBOD), and
(xi) CGM in-Charge, DBOD, Member Secretary .
The terms of reference of the Group are :
(a) To review the supervisory role of the boards of banks / financial institutions and to
obtain feedback on the functioning of the boards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency,
disclosures, audit committees, etc.;
(b) To study the system prevalent in banks / financial institutions for monitoring by the
board, the implementation of the policies laid down by it;
(c) To make recommendations for making the role of board of directors more effective with
a view to minimising risks and over-exposure.
(d) Any other matter relevant to the subject.
The Group can invite experts and directors of banks and other corporates to participate in
one or more of their meetings as considered necessary. The Group has been requested to submit
its report within three months.  The Secretariat of the Group would be provided by the
Department of Banking Operations and Development, Central Office.
It may be recalled that as part of its review of the impact of recent developments on long-term
objective of financial sector reforms, the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
the year 2001-2002 announced on October 22, 2001, that the Reserve Bank proposes to set up a
consultative group of directors of a select group of commercial banks and financial institutions
to suggest, for consideration by the Government/RBI, measures that should be taken to
strengthen the internal supervisory role of Boards.[paragraph 51].
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No: 2001-2002/626