Legal reform to focus sharply on the interests of the public, and not those of the public
servant in the functioning of the governmental and public delivery systems, clear
mechanisms for establishing accountability for performance by public agencies, freedom
of information and full disclosure of all financial decisions made by the Government and
its multifarious agencies and fiscal empowerment are some of the initiatives we need at
the present juncture. The last was the most difficult task in view of the deadweight of the
past, but it could no longer be avoided. This was stated by Dr. Bimal 
t
Reserve Bank of India today. He was delivering the 16 C D Deshmukh Memorial
"We need a new "political-bureaucratic" compact based on well-defined division of
responsibility and accountability" , Dr. Jalan stated and pointed out that this was the
harder part of the second generation reforms. Explaining this, he stated that today the
non-governmental sector had a dynamism and momentum of its own and in services
sector, Indian institutions, corporations and individuals have shown exceptional
fiscal house in order and improved our public delivery systems, no amount of macro-
policy reforms by themselves would be sustainable or yield permanent results, he added.
Citing an example, he pointed out that if  of primary schools run by Government
agencies, thousands of primary health  set up by district authorities, and hundreds
of Central and State Universities continue to under-perform or decline, two or three hi-
tech cities and one or two new business schools and technical institutes cannot make up
for the gigantic loss of human resources. "It is simply a question of relative proportions,
India today has the knowledge and the skills to produce and process a wide variety of
is international capital mobility and integration of global financial markets.  Domestic
is no longer a binding constraint.  Increased mobility of capital has ensured that global
resources would flow to countries which can show high growth and high returns.  It is
possible now for India to take advantage of a virtuous circle of higher growth, higher
h
savings continue to be important for development.  However, scarcity of domestic capital
favour industrial and consumer products and services. Another important factor in India's 
and inextricable linkages between public good and private progress", he stated.
centres
lakhs
performance at the global level. At the same time, it was also clear that unless we put our
organised by India International Center in Delhi. lecture 
Jalan, Governor,
January 15, 2001
A New Beginning or A False Dawn?"
Twenty-First Century: "India's Economy in the He, however, pointed out that the "death of distance" and the growing integration of
global product, services and financial markets in recent years have also presented new
challenges for management of the national economy - not only in India but all over the
world. Another consequence of recent global trends, according to Dr. Jalan was the
greater vulnerability of national economies to developments outside their own borders.
"In addition to the direct effects (which are currently most visible in the volatile stock
Dr. Jalan stated that at the beginning of the new century, the challenge before us was in
two directions - how to seize the new opportunities, while at the same time, protecting
ourselves against unanticipated risks. He felt that insularity or isolation was not the
answer, as such an approach would promote neither growth nor stability. In Dr. 
judgement, given the phenomenal change that has taken place in the world economy and
India's present comparative advantage, the present direction of policies to make India
more open and more competitive was right and deserved to be accelerated. "Without a
major transformation of our economic policies and effort to align them with
contemporary realities of global trade, investment and technology, it is not feasible for
India to occupy the high ground and realise its full potential for growth and
According to Dr. Jalan, decisive move towards more and deeper economic reforms was
the first strategic priority for the future. He, however, cautioned that it would be a grave
mistake to misconstrue the need for economic reforms with a call for less role for
Government or public policy in widening opportunities and creating a positive
environment for equitable development. "In developing countries, such as India, with
massive illiteracy and underdevelopment of infrastructure, Government must continue to
have an important and crucial role in creating the necessary conditions for growth
through investments in areas, such as, education, health, water supply, irrigation,
infrastructure, etc. These tasks cannot be taken over by the market. 
reforms must result in strengthening the ability of Governments to do what they need to
do by helping to generate higher growth, higher revenue and higher productivity," he
stated and pointed out at the recent experience of several transitional and emerging
market economies that showed that economic reforms were necessary but by no means a
sufficient condition for growth and development.
Successful economic
development," he argued.
Jalan's
markets), the indirect effects due to "contagion" can be quite serious," he argued.
Jalan stated. to further growth, Dr. 
external capital inflows and higher domestic incomes and savings, which in turn can leadeconomic renewal and positive growth impulses were now occurring largely outside the
public sector. In the larger Governmental sector, there was a marked deterioration not
only in terms of output, profits and public savings but also in provision of vital public
services in the fields of education, health, water and transport. These two elements -
He pointed out that most of our public resources were now dissipated in payment of
salaries or interest on past debt with little or no resources available for expansion of
Dr. Jalan lamented that after more than 50 years of experience of independent
, our problems in the management of public resources at different levels
have only become more and more intractable. Illustrating this, he pointed out that there
process. For historical reasons, however, our legal system provides full protection to the
private interests of the so-called "public servant", often at the expense of the public that
he or she is supposed to serve. In addition to complete job security, any group of public
servants in any public sector  can go on strike - hospitals, universities,
schools, banks, buses, post offices, railways, municipalities - in search of higher wages,
public in whose name they have been appointed in the first place. The "authority" of
Governments at, both Centre and States, to enforce their decisions has eroded over time.
Governments at different levels may announce plans and programmes to provide social
services (such as, expand literacy), but these initiatives do not get implemented on the
Dr.  argued that the worst affected from fiscal stringency and the atrophy of the
not the affluent classes, or persons elected or appointed by the people to serve them. Dr.
Jalan advised that it was useful to keep this perspective in mind as a fair amount of
important to embark on an urgent programme to revitalise the governance and public
delivery systems at all levels of Government - centre, state and districts. Without
focus of its activities to what matters most for the future development of the country -
strengthening the ability of the Government to do what it alone can do, and narrowing the
Jalan mentioned that in addition to economic reforms, it was now also In this context, Dr. 
defence of the "status quo" was done in the name of the weaker sections of the society.
 and certainly programmes are dependent on public services, public investment and public 
public delivery systems were likely to be the poor, the unemployed, and the illiterate who
Jalan
fiscal  stringency. ground because of 
promotions and bonuses for themselves irrespective of the costs and inconvenience to the
organisation
was a widespread respect for the "rule of law" despite the legendary delays in the judicial
administration
public or publicly supported services in vital sectors.
fiscal deterioration and inability to provide essential services - were intimately connected.
Jalan stated Focussing on the growing public-private dichotomy in our economic life, Dr. education, health, clean environment, and a functioning infrastructure - India cannot
Release : 2000-2001/1019 Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
adequately seize the opportunities that lie ahead.