January 3, 2001
The guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector were issued by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on January 22, 1993.  Out of various applications received,
RBI had granted licences to 10 banks.  After a review of the experience gained on the
functioning of the new banks in the private sector, in consultation with the Government,
The revised guidelines for entry of new banks in private sector are given below. The
guidelines are indicative and any other relevant factor or circumstances would be kept in
view while considering an application. With the issue of revised guidelines, applications
 The initial minimum paid-up capital for a new bank shall be Rs.200 crore. The
initial capital will be raised to Rs.300 crore within three years of commencement
of business. The overall capital structure of the proposed bank including the
 capital shall be approved by the RBI.
 The promoters’ contribution shall be a minimum of 40 per cent of the paid-up
capital of the bank at any point of time. The initial capital, other than the
promoters’ contribution, could be raised through public issue or private
placement. In case the promoters’ contribution to the initial capital is in excess of
the minimum proportion of 40 per cent, they shall dilute their excess stake  after
one  year of the bank’s operations. (In case divestment     after one year is
proposed to be spread over a period of time, this would require specific approval
of the RBI). Promoters’ contribution of 40% of the initial capital shall be locked
 While augmenting capital to Rs.300 crore within three years of commencement
of business, the promoters will have to bring in additional capital, which would
be at least 40 per cent of the fresh capital raised. The remaining portion could be
raised through public issue or private placement. The promoters’ contribution of
a minimum of 40% of additional capital will also be locked in for a minimum
 NRI participation in the primary equity of a new bank shall be to the maximum
extent of 40 per cent.  In the case of a foreign banking company or finance
company (including multilateral institutions) as a technical collaborator or a co-
promoter, equity participation shall be restricted to 20 per cent within the above
ceiling of 40 per cent. In cases of shortfall in foreign equity contributions by
NRIs, designated multilateral institutions would be allowed to contribute foreign
equity to the extent of the shortfall in NRI contribution to the equity.  The
proposed bank shall obtain necessary approval of Foreign Investment Promotion
Board of the Government of India and Exchange Control Department of RBI.
(iv)
period of 5 years from the date of receipt of capital by the bank.
(iii)
for a period of five years from the date of licensing of the bank. in 
(ii)
authorised
(i)
2. Guidelines
pending with RBI would be treated as lapsed.
it has now been decided to revise the licensing guidelines.
Guidelines on entry of new banks in the private sector The new bank should not be promoted by a large industrial house. However,
individual companies, directly or indirectly connected with large industrial
houses may be permitted to participate in the equity of a new private sector bank
up to a maximum of 10 per cent but will not have controlling interest in the bank.
The 10 per cent  limit would apply to all inter- connected companies belonging to
the concerned large industrial houses. In taking a view on   whether the
companies, either as promoters or investors, belong to a large industrial house or
to a company connected to a large industrial house, the decision of the RBI will
 The proposed bank shall maintain an arms length relationship with business
entities in the promoter group and the individual company/ ies investing upto 10%
of the equity as stipulated above. It shall not extend any credit facilities to the
promoters and company/ ies investing up to 10 per cent of the equity. 
relationship between business entities in the promoter group and the proposed
bank shall be of a similar nature as between two independent and unconnected
entities. In taking view on whether a company belongs to a particular Promoter
 
An NBFC with a good track record desiring conversion into a bank should satisfy
criteria :
• The NBFC should have a minimum net worth of Rs.200 crore in its latest
balance sheet which will stand increased to Rs.300 crore within three years
• The NBFC should not have been promoted by a large Industrial House or
owned/controlled by public authorities, including Local, State or Central
Governments.
• The NBFC should have acquired a credit rating of not less than AAA rating
• The NBFC should have an impeccable track record in compliance with RBI
regulations/directions and in repayment of public deposits and no default
should have been reported.
• The NBFC desiring conversion into bank should have capital adequacy of not
less than 12 per cent and net .
• The NBFC on conversion to a bank will have to comply with Capital
Adequacy Ratio and all other requirements such as lending to priority sector,
promoters’ contribution, lock-in period for promoters’ stake, dilution of
promoters’ stake beyond the minimum, NRI and foreign equity participation,
2
3. Other Requirements
arms length relationship, etc. as applicable to banks.
not more than 5 per cent NPAs of 
(or its equivalent) in the previous year.
from the date of conversion.
the following 
NBFCs into private sector banks Conversion of (vii)
Group or not, the decision of RBI shall be final.
The
(vi)
be final.
(v) The bank shall be required to maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10
 
a) the new bank will have to observe priority sector lending target of 40 per
 the new bank will be required to open 25 per cent of its branches in rural
and semi-urban areas to avoid over concentration of their branches in
metropolitan areas and cities on the same lines as new private sector
 The promoters, their group companies and the proposed bank shall accept the
 The new bank shall not be allowed to set up a subsidiary or mutual fund for at
 The headquarters of the proposed new bank could be in any location in India as
decided by the promoters.
 The new bank shall make full use of modern infrastructural facilities in office
equipments, computer, telecommunications  etc.  in order to provide cost-
effective customer service. It should have a high powered Customer Grievances
 The new bank will be governed by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, other relevant Statutes and the
Directives, Prudential regulations and other Guidelines/Instructions issued by
RBI and the regulations of SEBI regarding public issues and other guidelines
 In terms of Rule 11 of the Banking Regulation (Companies) Rules, 1949
applications shall be submitted in the prescribed form (Form III).  In addition ,
the applications should furnish a project report covering business potential and
viability of the proposed bank, the business focus, the product lines, proposed
regional or locational spread, level of information technology capability and any
other information that they consider relevant.  The project report should give as
much concrete details as feasible, based on adequate ground level information
and avoid unrealistic or unduly ambitious projections.   Applications should also
be supported by detailed information on the background of promoters, their
expertise, track record of business and financial worth, details of promoters’
direct and indirect interests in various companies/industries, details of
credit/other facilities availed by the promoters/ promoter ies)/other
Group company( ies) with banks/financial institutions, and details of proposed
OCBs.
3
participation by foreign banks/NRI/
company(
i)
4. Procedure for Applications
applicable to listed banking companies.
(vii)
Cell to handle customer complaints.
(vi)
(v)
least three years from the date of commencement of business.
(iv)
system of consolidated supervision by the Reserve Bank of India.
(iii)
banks established under guidelines laid down by RBI in January 1993,
b)
cent of net bank credit as applicable to other domestic banks, and
In order to ensure level playing field, (ii)
per cent on a continuous basis from the commencement of its operations.
(i) Applications for setting up new banks in the private sector, along with other
details as mentioned above, should reach the following address before March 31,
.
Reserve Bank of India,
Centre, 
Cuffe Parade, 
Mumbai 400 005.
 In view of the increasing emphasis on stringent prudential norms, transparency,
disclosure requirements and modern technology, the new banks need to have
strength and efficiency to work profitably in a highly competitive environment.
As a number of banks are already functioning, licences will be issued on a very
selective basis to those who conform to the above  requirements and who are
likely to conform to the best international and domestic  standards of customer
service and efficiency. Preference will however be given to promoters with
expertise of financing priority areas and in setting up banks specialising in the
financing of rural and agro based industries.  The number of licences to be issued
in the next three years may be restricted to two or three of the best acceptable
proposals. This number would also include permission granted to any NBFC for
conversion into bank. {If the number of acceptable proposals of the highest
standards are more than three, this limit may be relaxed on recommendation of
the Advisory Committee (see below).  In that case the period for issuing  new
 At the first stage, the applications will be screened by RBI to ensure prima facie
eligibility of the applicants.  Thereafter,  the applications  will  be referred to a
..
Shri C.G. 
Dipankar 
Chief General Manager of the Department of Banking Operations and Development of
RBI will be the Secretary of the Advisory Committee.
 The Committee will set up its own procedures for screening the applications. The
Committee will reserve the right to call for more information as well as have
discussions with any applicant/s and seek clarification on any issue as required by
it. The Committee will submit its recommendations to RBI for consideration
within three months after the last date of receipt of applications by RBI (i.e. 30
....20014
(iii)
Member State Bank of India
Basu, former Chairman of Shri 
Member Auditor General of India
Somiah, former Comptroller and
Chairman Reserve Bank of India
Dr. I.G. Patel, former Governor of
high-level Advisory Committee to be set up by RBI comprising
ii)
licences may be stretched to four or five years}.
i)
5. Procedure for RBI decisions
Colaba,
Centre I, World Trade 
Department of Banking Operations and Development,
The Chief General Manager-in-Charge,
ii)June 2001).  The decision to issue an in-principle approval for setting up of a
 The validity of the in-principle approval issued by RBI will be   one year from
the date of granting  in-principle approval and would thereafter lapse
 After  issue of the in-principle approval for setting up of a bank in the private
sector, if any adverse features are noticed subsequently regarding the promoters
or the companies/firms  with which the promoters are associated and the group in
which they have interest, the Reserve Bank of India may impose additional
Release : 2000-2001/963
5
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
conditions and if warranted, it may withdraw the in-principle approval.
v)
automatically.
iv)
bank will be taken by RBI. RBI’s decision will be final.