• RBI cuts Bank Rate by 0.50 percentage point, from 7.0 per cent to 6.50 per cent to
• RBI reduces CRR by 2.0 percentage points from 7.50 per cent to 5.50 per cent,
releasing on additional liquidity of Rs.6,000 crore to banks.  RBI also removes
• Interest rate paid on eligible CRR balances increased further to the level of Bank
Rate i.e. 6.5 per cent (from 6.0 per cent since April 21, 2001 and 4.0 per cent
earlier).
• 
• In view of global uncertainties, a projection in the range of 5.0 per cent to 6.0 per
cent growth rate for 2001-02 considered reasonable for monetary management.
• 
• RBI provides operational flexibility to banks in “Loan System” for credit
• FIs.
• rationalised.
Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, in a meeting with Chief Executives of major
commercial banks presented the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
2001-02.  After reviewing the domestic and external developments, Governor stated that
despite several uncertainties, the fundamentals of the economy, as reflected in moderate
inflation, stable and low interest rates, high foreign exchange reserves, large 
stock and competitive advantage of information technology related industries, are strong.
He further stated that according to the present indicators, the liquidity in the system will
remain adequate to meet all legimate requirements for credit.  He said that unless
circumstances change unexpectedly RBI will endeavor to maintain the current interest
rate environment.
  
 and Monetary Developments
I. Mid-term Review of Macroeconomic
foodgrains
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001-2002
Mid-term Review of
RBI Current Account Facility being 
SLR investments by banks and RBI initiates steps to closely monitor non-
delivery.
Measures to strengthen financial system to continue.
Monetary Policy stance to continue as in the first half of the year.
CRR. most of the exemptions available on 
touch its lowest since May 1973.
Highlights
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001-2002
RBI Governor announces Mid-term Review of2. On the d omestic front, quoting India Meteorological Department and the Ministry
of Agriculture, Governor stated that the agricultural growth in 2001-02 is expected to be
significantly higher than the previous year.  On the other hand, the position regarding
revival of industrial sector and export growth in the first half of the current year was not
favourable.  Considering the likely rate of growth in agriculture during the current year,
the unfavourable behaviour of industrial and export sectors, taking in view of the global
uncertainty, Governor mentioned that a firm projection of revised growth rate for the year
as a whole is difficult.  However, considering various factors, and assuming no further
serious disruption in the world economic environment, at this stage, he felt that a
projection in the range of 5.0 to 6.0 per cent growth rate in the current year may be
reasonable for the purpose of credit and monetary management.  Very few countries in
3. Governor stated that the inflation outlook for the year appears comfortable as
agricultural growth prospects remain positive, and foodgrain stocks are very high.  The
annual inflation rate is 3.2 per cent as against 7.4 per cent a year ago.
4. Governor indicated that the growth rates in money supply and aggregate deposits
of scheduled commercial banks in the current financial year were slightly higher than the
growth rates observed a year ago.  He added that the relative attractiveness of bank
deposits has improved and if this deposit growth continued it may pose a challenge to the
banking system in deploying resources, particularly in the context of sluggishness in
credit and investment demand. Governor added that late in September and early October,
there had been some pick up in non-food bank credit and other resource flows to the
commercial sector from the banking system.  Commenting on the sources contributing to
the reserve money expansion he stated that while net RBI credit to the Central
Government showed a modest increase, RBI’s net foreign exchange assets increased
significantly.  He expected that the reserve money expansion may remain moderate
during 2001-02.
5. While reviewing the borrowing programme of the Central Government, Governor
mentioned that the Government market borrowing programme was conducted by
elongating the maturity pattern and at a lower cost.  The weighted average maturity of
borrowing was 13.9 years against 10.6 years a year ago and the weighted yield at 9.96 per
cent was lower by nearly 100 basis points.  RBI continued to combine auction issues with
acceptance of private placement of dated securities consistent with market conditions in
6. Centre’s fiscal deficit upto August 2001 was higher and constituted about one
half of the budget estimates for the current year.   A  steady increase in net foreign
currency assets of the Reserve Bank combined with subdued real economic activity
created a situation of excess liquidity during most part of the first half of the year.
Commercial banks already hold government securities much in excess of the prescribed
2
The 
its debt management policy.
the world would show a growth rate of this order in the current year, he added.
Domestic DevelopmentsStatutory Liquidity Ratio ( SLR) to the extent of Rs.1,29,450 crore, consisting 36.3 per
cent of NDTL.
7.    He stated that the overall interest rate structure had come down substantially in the
last two years and continued to show a softening trend.  The prime lending rates (
of scheduled commercial banks softened.  As banks are permitted to lend to exporters and
their prime customers at sub- PLR rates, the cost of bank borrowings to such 
has come down even further.  Long-term domestic deposit rates of public sector banks
declined from 10.50 per cent in March 2001 to 9.25 per cent in October 2001.
8. As announced in the annual policy Statement of April 2001, during the first half
of the fiscal year, the Reserve Bank continued to provide appropriate liquidity through its
Repo operations.  The interest rate environment also remained fairly soft across
maturities as well as various instruments and the yield on 10-year government securities
declined by about 100 basis points, between April and mid-October 2001.
9. Governor expressed concern over the global slowdown in the world economy and
the impact of September 11 events.  He stated that the outlook for growth in major
industrialised countries as also emerging economies has been adverse.  Quoting IMF, he
stated that the downturn in the emerging markets of Asia may continue for a longer
period.  However, India and China are less affected.  India is relatively insulated from
GDP and service oriented and cost
efficient information technology sector.
10.  Consequent upon September 11 events, forex markets became volatile with rupee
depreciating by 1.3 per cent during the first ten days and affecting the government
securities market. Stability was restored in financial markets in particular money and
government securities markets, after a series of measures were announced by the Reserve
Bank between September 15 and 25, 2001.  Mentioning that there was no perceptible
upturn in industrial output, he hoped that as global markets gain back momentum after
some time, it would have a 
11. Reiterating the India’s experience in managing the external sector during periods
of external and domestic uncertainties, he highlighted the need for continuous vigilance
and the importance of building adequate safety nets to withstand the effects of
unexpected shocks and market uncertainties.  In this context, Governor mentioned that
India’s exchange rate policy of focusing on managing volatility with no fixed rate target,
while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange
rate movements over a period in an orderly way, has stood the test of time.  RBI will
continue to follow the same approach of watchfulness, caution and flexibility in regard to
the  market; monitor closely, the developments in the financial markets at home and
abroad and carefully coordinate its market operations with appropriate monetary,
3
regulatory and other measures as considered necessary from time to time.
forex
favourable impact on the investment climate in India also.
global slowdown because of its lower share of trade in 
External Developments
corporates
PLRs)12. India’s foreign exchange reserves have increased sharply by over US $ 10 billion
from US $ 35.0 billion as on October 13, 2000 to US $ 45.1 billion by October 12, 2001.
The overall approach to the management of India’s foreign exchange reserves in recent
years has reflected the changing composition of balance of payments, and has
endeavoured to reflect the “liquidity risks” associated with different types of flows and
other requirements.  The policy for reserve management is thus judiciously built upon a
host of identifiable factors and other contingencies. Governor expressed confidence about
India’s comfortable foreign exchange reserves but cautioned that there can be no cause
for complacency.  He mentioned that the quantum of reserves in the long run is in line
with the rate of growth in the economy, the share of external sector in the economy and
the size of risk-adjusted capital flows.  This provides greater security against
unfavourable or unanticipated developments of the type witnessed recently as well as
13. On account of global slowdown, exports have not done well during the current
year and imports increased by 2.5 per cent as against an increase of          13.8 per cent
last year.  Trade deficit in the first five months of the current financial year at US $ 4.6
billion was higher   than that of US $ 3.7 billion in the same period last year.  For the rest
of the year, there is some uncertainty on the likely course of international oil prices.  On
present reckoning, it is expected that the current account deficit for the year 2001-02 will
still be well below 2.0 per cent of GDP.
14. Governor recalled that as part of the efforts to provide support to exporters during
the prevailing period of global uncertainty, the Reserve Bank advised reduction in ceiling
interest rates on rupee export credit by 1.0 percentage point across the board for a period
of six months.  Taking into account forward premia, the effective interest cost on rupee
export credit is only 3.0-4.0 per cent (assuming a forward premia of 5.0 per cent), which
is internationally competitive.  Similarly, exporters are free to avail of foreign currency
15. In the past, several measures have been introduced to ensure time ly delivery of
credit to exporters at reasonable cost and removal of procedural hassles.  He mentioned
the work of the survey on exporters’ satisfaction has been launched by the National
16. In t he recent period, procedures for financial transactions such as remittances,
investments and maintenance of bank accounts, etc., for              non-residents have been
considerably simplified.  Foreign direct investment ( FDI) is permitted under the
automatic route for most activities except in certain circumstances and for a very small
are allowed to increase the FII investment limit upto the
sectoral caps/statutory ceilings as applicable. A number of steps have been taken to
GDR market and to give opportunity to Indian shareholders
to divest their shareholding in the GDR market abroad.  Indian companies wishing
to make acquisitions of foreign companies or direct investment abroad in Joint
Ventures/Wholly Owned Subsidiaries can now invest upto US $ 50 million on an annual
4
ADR/
ADR/ improve liquidity in the 
negative list.   Indian Companies 
NCAER), New Delhi. Council of Applied Economic Research (
loans in the currency of their choice at internationally competitive rates.
during earlier years.basis through automatic route with additional block allocation of foreign exchange
17. Over a period, considerable flexibility has been gi ven to the corporates to hedge
their forex exposure in the market. Instruments available to the corporates for hedging
their exchange risks include forward exchange cover, currency options, foreign currency-
rupee swaps, hedging of the loan exposures etc.  Banks are also allowed to hedge their
asset-liability portfolio, after obtaining necessary policy approval in this regard from their
top management.
18. It is observed that sometimes a noticeable portion of the corporate foreign
currency commitments tend to remain unhedged by the coporates on the basis of their
perceptions of the market and these could impact the overall financial status of the
corporates under circumstances of severe uncertainties.  Hence, he desired that banks
who have large exposures to such corporates to put in place a system for monitoring such
unhedged external exposures.
19. The Reserve Bank will continue with its efforts to simplify procedures, reduce
documentation requirements and further liberalise opportunities for productive
investment in India by NRIs and others and by Indian corporates/entities abroad.
Governor welcomed further suggestions from experts, corporates and market participants
in these areas through e-mail at 
    
20. Governor recalled that the annual  policy Statement of April 2001 had indicated
that under normal circumstances and barring emergence of any adverse and unexpected
developments in domestic or external sectors, the overall stance of monetary policy for
2001-02 will be: provision of adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support revival
of investment demand, and imparting greater flexibility to the interest rate regime in the
medium-term, to continue the present stable interest rate environment with a preference
21. During the first half of the year, Governor indicated that it was feasible to
maintain adequate liquidity in the market, primarily through flexible operation of repos
and reverse repos under   LAF combined with open market operations, when necessary.
Notwithstanding a high level of market borrowing by the Government, it was also
feasible to maintain a stable interest rate environment, with further softening of interest
rates.
22. At the short end of the market, the average call money rate came down sharply
from 8.6 per cent in early-April to 7.0 per cent in mid-October 2001.  During this period,
the LAF repo rate also came down from 7.0 per cent to 6.5 per cent.  The CRR was
reduced by 50 basis points to 7.5 per cent, effective May 19, 2001. Responding to these
operations, the interest rates in other money market instruments also showed a declining
5
for softening to the extent the evolving situation warrants.
the Second Half of 2001-2002
II. Stance of Monetary Policy for
helpnri@rbi.org.in
subject to certain conditions.trend. At the long end of the market, the secondary market yields on government paper in
the range of 10-20 years have softened from 10.08-10.70 per cent in April to 9.12-9.92
23. The decline in inflation rate since the mid-1 990s, despite occasional supply and
external shocks has had a positive impact on inflation expectations.  Because of this, it
has been possible to reduce nominal interest rates on a sustained basis despite a high level
of fiscal deficit and other structural rigidities. While the risks of inflation are relatively
low, as of now, in the context of ample liquidity already available in the system, RBI will
continue to carefully manage the liquidity with a judicious mix of the range of
instruments available with it.
24. Despite several uncertainties, Governor felt that the fundamentals of the economy
as reflected in moderate inflation, stable and low interest rates, high foreign exchange
reserves, large foodgrain stocks and competitive advantage of information technology
related industries, are still strong. The prospects for agricultural growth during this year
remain positive. Global and domestic inflationary outlook currently continues to be
favourable.  Governor, therefore, proposed to continue with the overall stance of
monetary policy announced in the April Statement for the remaining half of the current
year and ensure that all legitimate requirements for credit are met consistent with price
stability.  Unless circumstances change unexpectedly, RBI will also endeavour to
maintain the current interest rate environment.
25. Governor emphasised that the Bank Rate will continue to remain the principal
signaling instrument in so far as RBI is concerned, providing directional guidance to the
extent feasible, to general level of interest rates.  The LAF rates would operate around the
Bank Rate, with a flexible corridor, as more active operating instruments for day-to-day
liquidity management and steering short-term interest rates.
26. Governor, however, cautioned that while all efforts will be made to maintain the
current stance of monetary policy, two caveats are necessary in order to ensure that banks
and market participants do not take too complacent a view on the current monetary and
interest rate environment.  First, in their portfolio management, banks, primary dealers
( PDs) and other market participants must explicitly take into account that the interest rate
environment can change quite dramatically within a very short period of time. The
substantial decline in interest rates in the last couple of years has resulted in large gains,
realised and unrealised, to holders of medium and long-term securities.  It is of utmost
importance that these gains are not frittered away or used for illiquid market operations.
Second, it needs to be recognised that in view of certain structural characteristics of our
financial system, the scope for further softening in lending rates by banks and other
• Holders of term deposits in banks generally belong to fixed income groups and
expect a reasonable nominal interest rate, in excess of the long-term rate of
inflation.  This constrains the ability of banks to effect further reduction in their
6
financial intermediaries is limited. Among the factors, Governor mentioned :
per cent by mid-October 2001.lending rates without affecting their deposit mobilisation and the growth of
• The preference for fixed interest rates on term deposits effectively reduced the
• For public sector banks, the average cost of funds is over 7.0 per cent, combined
with non-interest operating expenses of 2.5 to 3.0 per cent of total assets, puts
pressure on the required spread over cost of funds.  Relatively high overhang of
Non-Performing Assets (
27. It is necessary to continue with the on-going efforts to reduce the impact of the
above structural constraints on the flexibility of our interest rate structure.  Recently, the
Government has taken important steps to reduce the prevailing interest rates on
contractual savings like Provident Funds and National Saving Schemes.  A more
sustainable and flexible interest rate regime for contractual savings has also been
recommended by the Expert Committee set up by the Government (Chairman: Dr. 
Reddy).  It will also be highly desirable for banks to move over to a variable interest rate
structure on longer-term deposits as early as possible.  Since interest rates could vary in
both directions, depending on the phase of the business cycle and inflationary outlook, a
variable interest rate regime on long-term deposits does not necessarily imply  lowering
of the average interest rate earned by depositors over a period of time (compared with a
fixed rate regime, which  old deposits over new deposits when interest rates are
coming down, and vice versa when rates are moving in the opposite direction).  In
addition, banks have to put in their best efforts to reduce their operating costs over time
III. Financial Sector Reforms and
     
28. Governor briefly reviewed the progress made so far in respect of structural
measures initiated by the Bank in the recent past to improve the functioning of the
various segments of financial markets and announced modifications to some of them.  He
pointed out that as far as possible, changes proposed, had been decided after extensive
consultations with experts and market participants and suggestions made by
29. Governor said that developments in equity market since March 2001, and
involvement of a few banks in providing substantial support to a few stock -
entities, contrary to RBI guidelines and normal prudential requirements, have raised
concerns regarding the potential vulnerability in India’s financial sector. As such, it was
possible, through temporary and limited liquidity support measures, to avoid the
“contagion” spreading from their activities in the equity market to the banking sector as a
whole or to other important segments of the financial sector, particularly the money and
7
broking
Recent Financial Market Developments
specialised journals. commentators in media as well as 
Monetary Policy Measures
by improving productivity and increasing their volume of lending.
favours
Y.V.
NPAs) pushes up further the lending rates.
flexibility that banks have in lowering their lending rates in the short run.
financial savings over the medium-term.government securities markets. The scope for “regulatory forbearance” has to be
minimized in the event of emerging weaknesses in a financial institution (irrespective of
whether its ownership is co-operative, public or private).
30. The recent experience has also shown that irresponsi ble and unethical behaviour
on the part of even a few co-operative banks in the country can have some contagion
effect beyond the particular area or the State concerned and may cause severe harm to
depositors, including smaller co-operative banks and impair confidence in the system.
Measures for off-site monitoring and inspection, particularly in respect of weak banks
and co-operative institutions, have already been introduced. RBI proposes to further
strengthen its monitoring and supervisory machinery.  In order to overcome supervisory
problems arising from the present three-pronged and multi-level institutional system
(consisting of the Centre, States and RBI), the Reserve Bank has suggested setting up of a
new Apex Supervisory Body for the entire urban co-operative banking sector.
31. Governor said that the Reserve Bank welcomes the on-going constructive
dialogue with UCBs and their representative associations. It will be prepared to further
improve/modify specific measures subject only to one condition, i.e., providing an
adequate, workable and transparent mechanism for protection of public deposits held in
the co-operative sector.
32. Governor indicated that recent events have also brought to the fore the need for
Boards of banks and financial institutions to exercise proper vigilance and supervision
over the functioning of commercial banking and other financial institutions. The Reserve
Bank proposes to set up a consultative group of directors of a select group of commercial
banks and financial institutions to suggest, for consideration by Government/RBI,
measures that should be taken to strengthen the internal supervisory role of Boards.
The following issues/measures were also discussed in the Statement:
(a) Bank Rate
• On the basis of a review of macroeconomic and monetary developments, the
Bank Rate is being reduced by 0.50 percentage point from 7.0 per cent to 6.50 per
cent with effect from the close of business today (October 22, 2001).  At this
(b) Cash Reserve Ratio - Reduction and 
33. All scheduled commercial banks [excluding Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs)] are,
at present, required to maintain with the Reserve Bank of India a cash reserve ratio
( CRR) of 7.5 per cent of their net demand and time liabilities ( NDTL).  While the
statutory minimum requirement of CRR maintenance at        3.0 per cent is obligatory on
CRR has been imposed from time to time.  At the same time, over a
8
the banks, additional 
Rationalisation
level, it is the lowest Bank Rate since May 1973.
Monetary Measuresperiod, various exemptions given to the banks on certain specific categories of liabilities
for the  requirement.  Exemptions and multiple prescriptions have increased the
complexity of CRR as an instrument of liquidity management. With a view to
rationalizing CRR prescription and moving towards the long-term goal of keeping 
normally at the statutory level, important changes are proposed in respect of the coverage
• It is proposed to reduce the CRR by 200 basis points to 5.50 per cent from
7.50 per cent of NDTL.  Effective from the fortnight beginning November 3,
2001, CRR will be reduced to 5.75 per cent; and effective fortnight beginning
December 29, 2001, the CRR will be reduced further to 5.50 per cent of
NDTL.
• At the same time, all the exemptions on the liabilities will be withdrawn
except inter-bank liabilities, for the computation of NDTL (for requirement of
CRR) with effect from fortnight beginning November 3, 2001.
34. It is expected that these changes wi ll facilitate the development of a short term
yield curve, develop money market, reduce the regulatory arbitrage between banks and
non-banks, enhance the availability of lendable resources with the banks and improve the
• At the present level of NDTL, the combined impact of the above two measures
will result in augmenting lendable resources of the banking system by about
Rs.8,000 crore (about Rs.6,000 
• RBI will continue to use the CRR instrument in both directions for liquidity
c) Interest on Cash balances Maintained with RBI
• With effect from fortnight beginning November 3, 2001, the interest paid on
eligible cash balances will be at the Bank Rate (i.e., 6.5 per cent).
  - 
35. The Liquidity Adjustment Facility ( LAF), introduced in June 2000, has emerged
as an effective and flexible instrument for influencing liquidity on a day-to-day basis.  A
package of measures was announced in the annual policy Statement in April 2001
encompassing changes in operating procedures of LAF, a strategy for smooth transition
of call money market to pure inter-bank market and a programme for rationalisation of
liquidity support available to the system. This has not caused any strain on the market.
Volatility in call money rates has also come down significantly.  It is encouraging to note
that the volume of repo operations by non-bank participants has been increasing in recent
period.
9
Progress Liquidity Adjustment Facility
LAF.) management in addition to other instruments (such as, the 
crore effective from November 3, 2001).
efficiency of indirect instruments in the conduct of monetary policy.
maintenance of 
CRR : as well as the level of 
CRR
CRR• In the context of improving the effectiveness of LAF, it is reiterated that in
addition to overnight repos, RBI will also have the discretion to introduce longer-
repos 
Commercial Paper –  
36. RBI issued fresh guidelines for issuance of Commercial Paper ( CP) on October
10, 2000 relaxing the terms and conditions and streamlining the procedures.  Further, to
facilitate conversion of physicals into demat, FIMMDA, in consultation with market
participants, depositories and RBI, prepared the related guidelines and made them public
• The notified amount of 91-day Treasury Bills ( TBs) has been increased to Rs.250
crore.  It has also been ensured that both the 91-day and 364-day TBs mature on
the same day in order to facilitate the availability of adequate fungible stocks of
TBs of varying 
• A Negotiated Dealing System ( NDS) is being introduced with a view to
facilitating electronic bidding in auctions and secondary market transactions in
government securities and dissemination of information on trades on a real-time
• The Clearing Corporation of India Limited ( CCIL) was registered on April 30,
2001 under the Companies Act, 1956 with the State Bank of India  as the chief
promoter.  The operationalisation of CCIL is expected to commence  with a test
 
•  With the approval of the Government, the new uniform price auction format will
• A scheme of retail participation for government securities on non-competitive
basis has been 
• The Reserve Bank has prepared a consultative paper drawing a road map for
developing Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal of Securities
(STRIPS).
37. The Satellite D ealer (SD) system was introduced in 1996 to serve as a second tier
to PDs in the government securities market with the particular objective of promoting
retail segment.
10
Review of the Satellite Dealer System
finalised.
be introduced on an experimental basis.
November 2001. run  in
basis.
maturities in the secondary market.
Development of Government Securities Market
on October 3, 2001, which seem to be working reasonably well.
Dematerialised Holding
upto 14-day period as and when required. term • The Reserve Bank has decided to undertake a review of SD system to  examine
the scope for establishing a better linkage between SDs and PDs and thereby
improving the SD system as an effective distribution channel at a retail level for
(a) Credit Information Bureau
38. The annual policy Statem ent of April 2001 had mentioned about the setting up of
the Credit Information Bureau ( CIB) to collect, process and share credit information on
• In order to operationalise the process of collection and dissemination of the data
on credit information by the CIB, RBI will constitute a Group drawing
representation from CIB, Indian Banks’ Association ( IBA), select banks and 
The Group will examine the possibility of the CIB performing the role of
collecting and disseminating information on the list of suit-filed accounts and the
(b) Non- SLR Investments  by Banks
and Financial Institutions
39. It has been observed that, of the investm ents by banks, a significant proportion of
the banks’ investments in non- SLR securities is through the private placement route. The
• In order to contain the risks arising out of non- SLR investment portfolio of banks
and FIs, in particular through the private placement route, it is proposed to issue
further prudential guidelines to be observed by banks which will be finalised after
• Banks and FIs have already been advised that effective October 31, 2001, they
will be permitted to make fresh investments and hold bonds and debentures,
dematerialised form.
• To enable the transparency of the trades including nomenclature of the bonds,
amount traded and the price at which traded, banks and FIs could evolve a
reporting mechanism and the CDSL can in turn disseminate such
information to the market.  These arrangements would apply uniformly to all
bonds issued by corporates, banks, FIs and State and Central Government
sponsored institutions directly or as Special Purpose Vehicles ( SPVs).
• Overall, any proposals of direct or indirect financing of the Government budgets,
directly or through SPVs should be eschewed and proposals should be for specific
monitorable projects, particularly in capital-intensive and high-cost sectors,
11
NSDL/
privately placed or otherwise, only in 
FIs. further consultation with banks and 
non-transparent practices in this market could be a matter of concern.
list of defaulters, including willful defaulters, which is presently handled by RBI.
FIs.
FIs. the borrowers among banks and 
Prudential Measures
government securities.including infrastructure.  Components of financing and returns need to be well
40. As a further step in ensuring transparency and credibility of their financial
positions, it has been decided that   banks should furnish the following additional
disclosures in the ‘Notes on Accounts’ in their balance sheets, from the year ending
• Movement of provisions held towards NPAs and movement of provisions held
• It has been decided to set up a Working Group comprising representatives of
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India ( ICAI), banks and RBI to identify the
compliance as also gaps in compliance with the accounting standards and
recommend steps to eliminate/reduce the gaps.
Supervision and Monitoring
41. The Reserve Bank had introduced in 1999 off-site returns to monitor liquidity and
interest rate risks on quarterly basis with the intention to finally move over to a
fortnightly reporting system.  The quarterly system has now  
• The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision ( BCBS) released the second set of
consultative documents on  New Capital Accord.  RBI has forwarded its
comments to Basel Committee, which have also been put on RBI website in May
2001.
• A scheme of Prompt Corrective Action ( PCA), based on  pre-determined trigger
points, is planned  as part of continued efforts  to enhance the existing supervisory
framework.
• In order to involve banks in the smooth switch-over to Risk-based Supervision
( RBS) process, the Reserve Bank has released a discussion paper seeking
comments/suggestions of experts/public.  It is  planned to hold a pilot run of the
RBS approach in due course.
42. Under the one-time settlement of NPAs scheme,  the public sector banks have
recovered a total sum of Rs.2,192 crore in respect of 5.23 lakh accounts as on July 30,
2001.
• Given that the purpose of these guidelines was to provide an opportunity for “one-
time settlement” within the specified time period, and sufficient time has already
been provided, it is not proposed to extend this scheme.  However, the broad
12
Settlement of Non-Performing Assets
stabilised.
towards depreciation on investments.
March 2002.
 (c) Transparency and Accounting Standards
defined and assessed.framework provided for settlement in the 1995 guidelines will continue to be in
place, and banks are free to design and implement their own policies for recovery
and write-off incorporating compromise and negotiated settlements with the
approval of their Boards, particularly for old and unresolved cases falling under
the 
43. As a follow-up, of April 2001 policy announcement after discussing various
issues involved, RBI has submitted a draft Bill on setting up of a separate Supervisory
• In order to strengthen the supervisory mechanism, RBI has since introduced off-
• In response to representations received from UCBs and their federations, it is now
proposed to allow UCBs to grant loans to individuals against security of shares,
subject to certain parameters.
• As per the annual policy Statement of April 2001, UCBs were required to achieve
certain higher proportion of their SLR holding in the form of government and
other approved securities as a percentage of their Net Demand and Time
Liabilities ( NDTL) by March 31, 2002.  UCBs and their federations have
represented that, in current market conditions, many smaller UCBs were facing
genuine difficulties in adhering to the time schedule in achieving the prescribed
levels of SLR holding.  In response to these representations, it is proposed to
• The Reserve Bank has already issued guidelines relating to capital adequacy
norms to be followed by UCBs.  It is clarified that, under the existing guidelines,
the scheduled UCBs are required to achieve the capital adequacy norms gradually
UCBs by March 2005.
44. The “Loan System” was introduced to minimise the risks of cash and liquidity
management on the part of the banking system, caused by volatile movements in cash
• In the current environment of short-term investment opportunities available to
both corporates and banks, banks will henceforth have the freedom to change the
composition of working capital by increasing the cash credit component beyond
13
crore and above, if they so desire. 20 per cent, for working capital limits of Rs.10 
credit component of working capital.
(a)   “Loan System” for Delivery of Bank Credit
Credit Delivery Mechanism
by March 2004 and the non-scheduled 
SLR holding. modify the time-frame for achieving the prescribed levels of 
UCBs. site monitoring system for scheduled 
Authority to the Central Government.
Urban Co-operative Banks
 category. NPA (b)  Consortium Arrangement for Food Credit
45. A Committee consisting of representatives of banks, RBI, Governmen t of India
and Food Corporation of India was constituted by the Reserve Bank for undertaking a
review of the consortium arrangement for food credit.
• The Report of the Committee is under consideration in consultation with the
concerned agencies and the Government.
 (c) 
46. Kisan Credit Cards ( KCCs) Scheme for eligible agricultural farmers has proved to
• To accelerate the scheme of KCCs to cover all eligible agricultural farmers within
the next 3 years, the Reserve Bank has advised all banks about their targets to be
achieved for 2001-02.
Universal Banking
• The Reserve Bank intends to process applications promptly in the light of
 in RBI’s circular to FIs on approach to Universal Banking
in April 2001.  In processing a specific proposal, the overwhelming consideration
of the Reserve Bank will be to meet the strategic objectives of the concerned
financial institution for meeting the varied needs of different categories of
customers, while at the same time ensuring healthy competition in the financial
system through transparent  and equitable regulatory framework applicable to all
47. The Reserve Bank had received applicatio ns for Certificate of Registration ( CoR)
from 36,505 Non-Banking Financial Companies ( NBFCs), of which, 13,815 applications
were approved and 18,355 were rejected as at the end of August 2001. RBI places
• RBI has, therefore, been discussing with the informal Advisory Group of 
and also with various NBFC associations, the need to promote the formation of a
Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO), particularly for the benefit of smaller
Upgradation
48. To facilitate banks to effectively participate in the payment and settlement
systems and to provide a road map of the various payment system projects, a draft
Payment System Vision Document was prepared; based on the feedback received from
14
Technology 
NBFCs.
NBFCs,
NBFC sector along prudent lines. substantial importance to further development of the 
Non-Banking Financial Companies
the participants in banking business.
considerations outlined
be successful.
Kisan Credit Cardsbanks and comments of the members of apex bodies such as the National Payments
.
• The Indian Financial Network ( INFINET) is already available for use by all banks
and common inter-bank applications are being implemented on this network.  One
of the systems provided by the Reserve Bank for quick, safe and secure
• The operationalisation of  the CCIL and the proposed implementation of 
would also obviate the need for having current account with RBI by some of the
non-bank entities.  This issue was examined by a Group.
49. Major legal reforms has been initiated in the banking sector covering areas such
as security laws, Negotiable Instruments Act, fraud on banks, regulatory framework of
banking, etc., were indicated.  Further progress in regard to various initiatives for legal
• The Working Group constituted by the Government for suggesting changes in the
provisions of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, has, inter alia , recommended the
introduction of truncation of cheques and electronic cheques and suggested
appropriate legal amendments.   The Working Group on Asset Securitisation has
drafted a Bill on Asset Securitisation which is under consideration of the
Government.  The draft legislation prepared by another Working Group
constituted by the Government to examine the vesting of powers with banks and
FIs for taking possession and sale of securities without intervention of the courts
has been put on the RBI Website in August 2001 seeking comments from the
• Proposals regarding amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934,
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, Government Securities Bill in replacement of the
• For drafting a legislation on Payment Systems in India, an international consultant
and an eminent Indian draftsman have been appointed by  RBI  in consultation
• An Expert Committee on Bank Frauds (Chairman: Dr.N.L. Mitra) submitted its
Report to RBI in September 2001 which has been put on the RBI website. The
Committee examined and suggested both the preventive and curative aspects of
bank frauds.  The  important recommendations of the Committee include: a need
for including financial fraud as a criminal offence and  amendments to the Indian
NDS15
with the National Payments Council.
Public Debt Act, 1944, are currently under consideration of the Government.
public.
reforms is given below:
Legal Reforms
by the Reserve Bank
Rationalisation of Current Account Facility
EFT). movement of funds in an electronic mode is the Electronic Funds Transfer (
finalised Council, the Vision Document is being Penal Code by including a new chapter on financial fraud;  amendments to the
Indian Evidence Act to shift the burden of proof on the accused person and
special provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure for transferring the properties
involved in the financial fraud and confiscating unlawful gains;  and preventive
measures including the development of Best Code Procedures by banks and .
• All the Advisory Groups constituted by the Standing Committee on International
Financial Standards and Codes have submitted their Reports to the Chairman of
the Standing Committee and these reports are placed on RBI 
 for wider dissemination.
Press Release No. 2001-2002/498
16
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
www.rbi.org.in
Website
International Financial Standards and Codes
The Report is being examined by the Reserve Bank.
FIs