Report of Advisory Group on
“Securities Market Regulation” released
  The Reserve Bank of India today released the full text of the Report of the Advisory
Group on “Securities Market Regulation” on its 
The Group has reviewed the evolution of the securities regulatory framework,
analyzed India’s reform initiatives and their impact and identified some important issues and
lacunae of the current regulatory structure which could form the basis for the future reform
agenda.  The Group has also discussed in some detail, the degree to which the Indian
securities regulatory framework is in line with the principles enunciated by the International
 of Securities Commission (IOSCO), so as to address the key objectives of
protecting investors, ensuring that markets are fair, efficient and transparent, and reducing
systemic risk. The recommendations of the Group are made to bring the Indian securities
market more in line with international best practices and cover, inter alia, enforcement of
securities regulation, co-operation in regulation, self-regulation, prudential issues, legal
The recommendations contained in this Report are the product of independent
evaluation and assessment of standards and codes undertaken by non-official experts,
and do not reflect the views of the Reserve Bank, or the Government of India or
India  or any other concerned regulatory agencies.
It may be recalled that Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes
was constituted in December 1999 under the Chairmanship of Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India with  Secretary (Economic Affairs), Government of India
as Alternate Chairman in order to identify and monitor developments in global standards and
codes, consider aspects of applicability of these standards to Indian financial system,
periodically review the status and make available its Reports to all  concerned 
in public or private sector.
The Standing Committee constituted ten Advisory Groups consisting of experts in
different subject areas. The Advisory Group on “Securities Market Regulation” was one
Shri Deepak S. Parekh as the Chairman and Shitin 
I.C.Jain, Nimesh Kampani, Uday Kotak and Ravi Narain among Members.  The Advisory
Group on Securities Market Regulation submitted its report to the Standing Committee on
May 2, 2001.  In accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, the
Release : 2000-2001/1551
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
reports of the Advisory Groups are being made available to the public for wider discussion.
Desai, Sarvashri among these Groups with 
organisations
Securities and Exchange Board of 
issues, market infrastructure and mutual funds.
Organisation
www.rbi.org.in Website 