Special Financial Package for
Large Value Exports
September 24, 2001
The Reserve Bank of India in consultation with the Government of India has drawn a
special financial package for large value exports of six select products, viz., pharmaceuticals,
agro chemicals, transport equipment, cement, iron and steel and electrical machinery, which
are internationally competitive and have high value addition. Manufacturer Exporters in
above products with export contracts of Rs.100 crore and above in value term in one year
would be eligible for the special financial package.  The validity period of the package will
be one year from October 1, 2001.
2. Exporters covered under the special financial package will be extended credit at
concessional rate of interest for an extended period upto 365 days at pre-shipment as well as
post-shipment stages as against the maximum periods of 270 days and 180 days respectively
applicable for normal export credits.  Further, the rate of interest of export credit for period
beyond 270 days and upto 365 days at pre-shipment stage will be the same as for normal pre-
shipment credit for period beyond 180 days and upto 270 days.  Similarly, post-shipment
credit will be extended for periods beyond 180 days and upto 365 days at the same rate of
interest as applicable for normal post-shipment  credit for the period beyond 90 days and upto
180 days.  Under this dispensation, the rates of interest which are now decided by banks on a
commercial basis generally upto a maximum of PLR + 4 per cent would now stand reduced
to a maximum of PLR + 0.5 per cent for the extended period of pre-shipment and post-
shipment credit.  This would result in substantial reduction in interest cost to exporters.  This
measure applicable for large value exports in select products is in addition to the across the
board reduction in ceiling interest rates on export credit announced earlier today.
3. Exim Bank will be permitted to extend buyers' credit of          Rs.200 crore without
reference to the Reserve Bank of India.  Similar permission will also be granted to the
participating banks.  Further, Exim Bank while approving export contracts will have freedom
to decide minimum advance/down payment, security and availability of ECGC cover subject
to post facto report to the Reserve Bank.  Further, Indian exporters will be permitted to
import raw material on credit terms for period beyond 180 days at the rate of interest upto
LIBOR +1 per cent under the special financial package, as against the current stipulation of
LIBOR + 0.75 per cent (ceiling).
Alpana Killawala
General Manager
Press Release No. 2001-2002/374