April 3, 2001
The Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes (Chairman:
Dr. Y.V. ) constituted the Advisory Group on Corporate Governance under the
Chairmanship of Dr. R.H.  with Dr. V.V. ,  Deepak M. , M.G.
,   and  P.  as members to study the present status of
applicability and relevance and compliance of international standards and codes of
 and emerging countries and suggest measures/ recommendations for achieving
The Advisory Group on Corporate Governance has submitted its Report on March 24,
2001 to Dr.Y.V. , Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank and Chairman of the Standing
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) principles, the models of corporate governance in various countries
U.S., U.K., East Asia and Europe.  The Group has also reviewed the present status of
corporate governance in India. The frame work of the Group covers the study of the corporate
governance mechanism prevailing in India with reference to 1) the private corporate sector,
2) banks and the development financial institutions, and 3) central and state public sector
enterprises set up under the Companies Act. In this context, the Group has compared the
corporate governance obtaining in India along with the international standards/principals of
OECD, London stock exchange combined code, Securities and Exchange Board of India
The Report has observed that the predominant form of corporate governance in India
is much closer to the East Asian "insider" model, where the promoters dominate governance
in every possible way.  In India, according to the Report, a detailed statutory framework of
corporate governance has been enacted in the Companies Act.  Therefore, the Report has
stated that it is desirable to amend the Companies Act suitably for enforcing good governance
The Report has indicated that since most of the Indian companies belong to the
"insider" model, it is essential to bring reforms quickly so as to make boards of
corporates/banks/financial institutions/public sector enterprises more professional and truly
autonomous. According to the Report, the first important step to improve governance
mechanism in public sector units is to transfer the actual governance functions to the boards
from the concerned administrative ministries and also strengthen the boards by streamlining
the appointment process of directors. Further, the Report underlined the need for public
sector banks to maintain a high degree of transparency in regard to disclosure of information.
The recommendations of the Group were in the areas of responsibilities of the board to stake
holders/shareholders, selection procedures for the appointment of directors of the board, size
and the composition of the board, committees to be appointed by the board for corporate
governance, disclosure and transparency standards, role shareholders, role of auditors, etc.
The recommendations of the Advisory Groups are an outcome of independent
and critical assessments undertaken by non-official experts. These recommendations do
not, however, constitute the views of the Reserve Bank or the Government of India or
other concerned regulatory agencies.
practices in India.
(SEBI) committee report, and Bank for International Settlement (BIS) principles.
Committee. In its Report, the Group has studied 
Reddy
the best practices in India.
industrialised
Chitale Rajendra Nilenkani Nandan Bhide
Satwalekar Sarvashri Desai Patil
Reddy
Advisory Group on "Corporate Governance" submits reportIn accordance with the terms of reference of the Standing Committee, it has been
decided to make the Report available to the public for wider discussion. The full text of the
Release : 2000-2001/1369
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
www.rbi.org.in Website Report of the Group can be accessed on the Reserve Bank 