 
 
09 Jan 2001 
 
 
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy: 2000 
 
The Department of Economic Analysis and Policy of the Reserve Bank of India has brought out 
the statistical publication titled ‘Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy: 2000’ containing time 
series data on major macroeconomic and financial variables for the Indian economy. This 
volume, which is third in the series, contains 213 tables and includes a new section on time series 
data with fortnightly, weekly, irregular and daily frequencies. Part IV details major growth rates 
and ratios and part V elaborates explanatory notes to the tables appearing in the publication.  
The data relates to national income, saving and investment, agriculture and industrial output, 
prices, money and banking, financial markets, government finances, foreign trade, balance of 
payments and exchange rates. Data are compiled from both within the Reserve Bank of India and 
from outside published sources and made available to researchers, analysts and other users at a 
single place. The Handbook can be viewed as one of the several steps taken by the Reserve 
Bank for improving transparency through data dissemination.  
The inland price of the book is Rs.250 per copy (inclusive of postages) with concessional price at 
Rs.200 for students, public libraries and educational institutions. The price for overseas buyers is 
US$ 70 inclusive of registered airmail book-post charges. The copy is available for sale in the 
Sales Section, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Reserve Bank of India, Ground 
Floor, Amar Building, P.M. Road, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001.  
Order for the purchase can be placed with the Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and 
Publications, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, City Ice 
Building, 2nd floor, Perin Nariman Street, Fort, Mumbai 400 001 on payment through demand 
draft or cheque drawn in favour of the Reserve Bank of India and payable at Mumbai only';. 
The publication is also available on RBI Website www.rbi.org.in  
P. V. Sadanandan 
Asstt. Manager 
Press Release : 2000-2001/988 
 
 
 