RBI issues Notifications to 
March 2, 2001
Following the announcement made by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for
2001-2002 the Reserve Bank has issued the following Notifications to liberalise the
Capital Account for certain purposes:
1) Indian companies wishing to make acquisitions of foreign companies or direct
investment abroad in Joint Ventures/Wholly Owned Subsidiaries  may now invest
upto US $ 50 Million on an annual basis through Automatic Route without being
subject to the three year profitability condition. Thus, the limit of investment upto US
$ 50 million which was earlier available in a block of three years would now be
2) invest  100 per cent of the proceeds of their ADR/GDR issues for
acquisitions of foreign companies and direct investments in Joint Ventures and
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries .  Earlier such investments out of ADR/GDR issues were
subject to a ceiling of 50 per cent.
3) A new facility for additional  Block Allocation of foreign exchange  to companies
with proven track record which  have already exhausted the limit of US $ 50 million
available under the Automatic Route for investment/acquisition overseas is also being
instituted by the RBI.  While considering such application, Reserve Bank would
consider (a) the financial position and business track record of the Indian company
(b) prima facie viability of the investments and justification for additional
requirement of foreign exchange and (c) contribution of the applicant company to the
external trade and other potential benefits to the country out of the investment. Such
Block allocation will be sanctioned by the Reserve Bank in advance and will,
therefore, enable Indian companies to negotiate and finalise their acquisitions/ direct
investments without having to secure permission of the Reserve Bank, subject to
post-facto reporting to the RBI. While providing such Block Allocation RBI would
also specify the means of financing as well as the time period over which such
4)  Any Indian company that has issued GDRs may acquire shares of foreign
companies  engaged in the same area of core activity upto an amount of US $ 100
million or an amount equivalent to ten times of their exports in a year, whichever is
higher. Earlier this facility was available only to Indian companies in certain sectors.
5) Two-way fungibility in ADR/GDR issues of Indian companies has been
introduced, subject to sectoral caps, wherever applicable.  Stock brokers in India may
now purchase shares  and deposit these with the Indian Custodian for issue of
GDRs by the overseas depository to the  extent of the GDRs that have
6) Indian companies will now be able to sponsor ADR/GDR issues  with an overseas
Depository against shares held by its shareholders who wish to use this option. The
issue price shall be determined by the Lead Manager to the issue and the issue
proceeds shall be repatriated within one month. The sponsoring company shall have
to comply with the provisions of the Scheme for Issue of  Foreign Currency
been converted into underlying shares.
ADRs/ ADRs/
ADRs/
permission would be valid.
Companies may 
available annually without any profitability condition.
liberalise Capital AccountConvertible Bonds and Ordinary Shares (through Depository Receipt Mechanism)
Scheme, 1993 and guidelines issued thereunder by the Central Government.
7)  The ban on overseas investments by registered partnership firms has been
removed. Partnership firms providing certain specified professional services, viz.
Chartered Accountancy, Legal services, Medical and Health care services,
Information technology and Entertainment Software related services would now be
able to invest abroad in foreign concerns in the same line of activity upto US $ 1
million under Automatic Route. For such investments exceeding US $ 1 Million
8) Indian employees who have the benefit of ESOP schemes in foreign owned
companies can now invest upto US $ 20,000 per annum.  Earlier this facility was
9) Foreign Institutional Investors ( FIIs) can invest in a company under the 
investment route upto 24 per cent of the paid up capital of the company.  This can be
increased to 40 per cent with the approval of the General Body of the shareholders by
a special resolution.  This limit has now been increased from 40 per cent to 49 per
cent.
Necessary Notifications have been issued and are available on the RBI 
Release : 2000-2001/1225
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
www.fema.rbi.org.in
Website
protfolio
available only to the extent of US $ 10,000 in a block of five years.
approval of the Reserve Bank will be necessary.