Proposed amendments to the Guidelines on
April 23, 2001
In November 10, 2000, the RBI had issued guidelines in respect of banks’
investments and advances in capital markets.  As announced at that time, the 
of these guidelines has been reviewed by the RBI-SEBI Technical Committee.  The
Report of the Committee was submitted to the RBI on April 12, 2001 and was
released on the same day for comments / suggestions by experts, market participants
and others. (The Report is available on RBI 
2. In the light of the recommendations of the Technical Committee, and comments
received, RBI proposes to make the following amendments in the guidelines issued in
(
3. The ceiling of 5 per cent, prescribed in the November 2000 guidelines, will
henceforth apply to   exposure of a bank to stock markets in all forms.  The
(a) direct investment by banks in equity shares, convertible debentures and units
 
(c) guarantees issued on behalf of brokers.
4. The 5 per cent ceiling will be computed in relation to the total advances  (including
commercial paper) as on March 31, of the previous year as against total outstanding
domestic credit as on March 31 of the previous year under the earlier guidelines.  It is
clarified that non-fund based facilities and investment by banks in non-convertible
debentures and other similar instruments (excluding commercial paper ), should not be
included in computing the total credit portfolio of a bank.  Further, for computing the
5 per cent norm, direct investment in shares by banks will be calculated at the price
 
to a few Stock 
5. An important finding of the Technical Committee was that, while the overall
exposure of banks in the capital market continue to be modest at 1.76 per cent of the
total advances, some relatively small banks (in terms of their share in total bank
credit) did not observe appropriate risk management guidelines, particularly in respect
of advances against shares and issue of guarantees to a few stock  entities
(including their associates and inter-connected companies).  In order to avoid such
unwarranted `nexus’ emerging between some inter-connected stock broking entities
and promoters / managers of some banks, the Technical Committee had recommended
that –
broking
Broking Entities
Avoidance of concentration of bank investments / advances (ii)
paid by banks at the time of acquisition of shares.
advances against shares and debentures; and (b)
of equity oriented mutual funds;
ceiling will cover:
total
Ceiling on Overall Exposure to Capital Market i) 
November 2000.
Website also).
working
Bank Financing of Equities and Investments in Shares(a) Each bank should fix, within the overall ceiling of 5 per cent, a sub-ceiling for
total advances to all the stock brokers and market-makers (both fund-based
and non-fund based, i.e., guarantees).
 The total fund based and non-fund based facilities sanctioned by a bank to a
single stock- broking entity, including its associates / inter-connected
companies, should not exceed the prudential norm of 10 per cent of the sub-
ceiling at (a) above for total advances to all the stock brokers.
6. It is proposed to leave to the discretion to fix both the sub-ceilings at (a) and (b)
above for total advances to all stock brokers as well as a single stock broker (and
connected undertakings), to the Boards of banks who should, however ,  keep in view
7. As a further safeguard to prevent any `nexus’ from emerging, it is proposed that
there should be a clear separation of responsibilities for making decisions with regard
to actual advances against shares / investments in shares on the one hand and
surveillance and monitoring of actual advances / investments in shares by a bank in
the light of prudential guidelines approved by its Board on the other.  It will be
desirable if the CMD / CEO of the bank is entrusted with the latter responsibility and
is not a member of the Investment Committee. Under this arrangement,
recommendations on investments in shares should be made by the  Investment
Committee, to be chaired by the Executive Director or Whole time Director or the
next Senior Officer and would not involve the CMD / CEO. The CMD / CEO should
review the investments through weekly / fortnightly reports from the Investment
Committee and ensure that actual investments and advances against shares are in
accordance with the prudential norms prescribed by the RBI / bank’s Board. The
CMD should have the management responsibility for surveillance and monitoring and
reporting the actual investments made / advances against shares, to the Board.
(c)
8. Under the November 2000 guidelines, banks are required to obtain a minimum cash
margin of 25 per cent for issue of guarantees, 25 per cent margin for advances against
demat shares, and a margin of 50 per cent for advances against shares in physical
form.  The SEBI-RBI Committee has recommended a uniform margin of 50 per cent
on all advances/guarantees including a minimum cash margin of 25 per cent for issue
of guarantees on behalf of any stock broking entity.  In the amended guidelines, it is
proposed to prescribe a uniform margin of 40 per cent on all advances/guarantees
with minimum cash margin of 20 per cent in respect of guarantees issued by banks to
(d)
9. The RBI-SEBI Committee had recommended that the maximum amount of
advance that can be granted to an individual against security of shares and debentures,
either in de-
10. It is, however, proposed to retain the existing guidelines on the maximum ceiling
of Rs.10  against physical shares and Rs.20  against de- shares
for individuals with the proviso that banks should not extend loans to the multiple
22
materialised lakh lakh
lakh. materialised or in physical form, should not exceed Rs.10 
Advances to individuals
take care of volatility in stock valuations.
Margins
the above recommendations of the Technical Committee.
(b)members of the same family or a group of employees of the same corporate or their
inter-connected entities. Such loans are meant for genuine individual investors and
collusive action by a group of individuals to take multiple loans should not be
supported.
(e) 
11. As mentioned above, advances/investments in most cases in stock market  are
well below the overall ceiling of 5%.  The above proposals should provide adequate
head-room for growth of banks’ support to capital market, while minimizing the
possibility of an unwarranted nexus emerging between some broking entities and
In respect of few banks whose present exposure  to the capital market is above the
(a) These banks should formulate a time-bound plan for gradually reducing their
exposure to stock markets in line with the amended guidelines.  This time-
bound plan, along with data on exposures under various categories of
advances/guarantees, should be submitted to the RBI by May 31, 2001.
Meanwhile, they should not make fresh advances and guarantees.
 The proposed 40% margin will apply to all advances/guarantees made after
April 23, 2001. Advances made before that date may continue at the existing
(c) CMDs/CEOs of all banks should review their present portfolio of
advances/guarantees and in case any  advances/guarantees were beyond the
limits prescribed by its Board (or they were in violation of November 2000
guidelines), such advances/guarantees should be reduced as early as
possible.  This review should also cover excessive advances/guarantees in
favour of particular entities and their inter-connected companies.
 
12. As proposed by the Technical Committee, a review of the amended Guidelines
will again be undertaken after six months.  For this purpose banks may submit data in
the prescribed form by October 2001, to the RBI.
These draft guidelines along with the Report of the RBI-SEBI Technical Committee
are again being released for comments / suggestions by market participants, experts
and others.  These comments should reach RBI at the address given below by May 3,
2001.
Shri M. R. 
and Development,
Central Office, World Trade Centre,
Cuffe Parade, 
Fax # (022) 218 3785
33
Mumbai 400 005.
Department of Banking Operations
Reserve Bank of India,
Chief General Manager-in-Charge,
Srinivasan,
Review of the amended Guidelines
margins until they come up for renewal.
(b)
overall ceiling of 5%, the following transitional provisions are proposed:
promoters/managers of a bank.
Transitional provisionsearly  May 2001.
Release : 2000-2001/1456
44
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
It is proposed to issue the final amended Guidelines in 