Multiple Price Method for LAF Auctions to continue
June 4, 2001
It has been decided, in consultation with market participants, to continue with the
procedures of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)  on May 8, 2001 except
that the Reserve Bank of India will no longer announce the rate at which the back-stop
facility would be made available to banks and primary dealers.  Those who wish to avail of
this facility will have to directly approach the Deposit Accounts Department of the Reserve
Bank of India, 
It may be recalled that the Monetary and Credit Policy for 2001-2002 had announced
several changes in the operating procedures of LAF.  The changed procedures came into
effect from May 8, 2001.  It was stated then that a new multiple price auction in place of
existing uniform price auction had been introduced on an experimental basis for one month
period during May 2001.  The policy stated that the system will be evaluated on the basis of
experience.  The experience was evaluated by the Reserve Bank in consultation with the
The LAF will now continue with the following features:
(a) The system of multiple price method of repo and reverse repo auctions will continue until
 As announced in the Monetary and Credit Policy 2001-2002, the Reserve Bank will have
an option to switchover to fixed rate repos on overnight basis once in a while as and when
considered necessary. The Reserve Bank will also have the discretion to introduce longer-
repos up to 
(c) As pointed out in the Monetary and Credit Policy 2001-2002, the standing liquidity
PDs have been split into two parts, viz., (
and (ii) back-stop facility. Of the total limits of liquidity support, the normal facility will
constitute about two-thirds and the back-stop facility about one third. Currently, the 
stop rate is being announced daily along with LAF results. The experience has been that
the 
The back-stop facility will be provided at the variable daily rate and fixed as detailed
 The rate will be 1.0 percentage point over reverse repo cut-off rate at which funds
 Where no reverse repo bid was accepted as part of LAF auction, the rate will be
2.0 to 3.0 percentage points over repo cut-off rate of the day emerged in LAF as
may be decided by Reserve Bank, the exact mark up depending upon the
 The rate for back-stop facility will be between 1.0 to 3.0 percentage points over
NSE- MIBOR, as may be decided by RBI, on Saturdays and on other days when
no bids for repo or reverse repo auctions have been received/accepted. In this case
Release : 2000-2001/1645
Press 
General Manager
Killawala Alpana 
also, the exact mark up will depend upon the assessment of liquidity conditions.
(iii)
assessment of the liquidity conditions.
(ii)
were injected earlier during the day in the regular LAF auctions.
(i)
below:
back-stop facility, as was intended, is being used sparingly.
back-
i) normal facility facilities available to banks and 
14 day period as and when required. term 
(b)
further notice.
market participants and was found to be satisfactory.
Mumbai Office to ascertain the rate applicable for the facility.
operationalised