PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 
www.rbi.org.in 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
March 18, 2006 
REPORT ON CURRENCY AND FINANCE 2004-05 
The Evolution of Central Banking in India 
This Report documents the evolution of central banking in India over its seventy year existence. The functions of 
the Reserve Bank of India have been changing over time as it has responded to the emerging requirements of 
the macro economy and continuously diversifying financial system. The efforts to constitute a central bank for 
India can be traced back to Warren Hasting’s proposal for a ‘General Bank of Bengal and Bahar’ in 1773. The 
initiatives with regard to central banking in the colonial era had to face stiff resistance. Many such proposals faced 
failures. The amalgamation of the three Presidency Banks and emergence of the ‘Imperial Bank of India’ in 1921 
was the first concrete step in this direction. A sequence of events subsequently led to introduction of the Reserve 
Bank Bill (1933) and the Reserve Bank of India Act came into force on January 1, 1935. The Reserve Bank 
commenced operations on April 1, 1935. It was nationalised on January 1, 1949 in terms of the Reserve Bank of 
India (Transfer to Public Ownership) Act, 1948. 
Functional Evolution of Central Banking 
The primary impulses for establishing central banks in many parts of the world in the twentieth century emanated 
from exigency of financing wars. The necessity to finance wars also led to nationalisation of many of the early 
central banks, which were functioning as private entities. Central banking efforts in India after independence were 
geared towards mobilising resources for planned economic development and ensuring price stability. Central 
bank mandates in developing countries such as India have gone well beyond typical central banking functions to 
encompass a wide range of developmental pursuits in order to promote economic growth. 
 
Central banking was initially practiced with a large number of informal norms, conventions and self-imposed 
codes of conduct. Instituting a medium of exchange and currency management alongwith monetary policy had 
been globally in focus till the Great Depression. With the passage of time, however, central banks took over a 
whole range of functions, becoming multi-tasking institutions that conduct monetary policy, regulate and 
supervise the banking system and perform a crucial role in the payment system. Crisis situations that emerged 
from time to time led to redefining of central bank mandates. The role of the lender of last resort evolved over-
time and enlarged into that of the regulator and supervisor, as also the custodian of financial stability. This gained 
credence in the face of danger of contagion as economies got integrated. The necessity to manage government 
debt emanated from the historic reasons of financing wars. The hazards of financing the persistent government 
deficits were, however, well recognised and such financing is being increasingly avoided. In the wake of South-
East Asian crisis of 1997, many central banks in developing countries initiated financial reforms. In this direction, 
central banks also played a vital role in development of the financial markets to strengthen the monetary policy 
transmission channels. Institutional development has been one of the major objectives of central banks in 
developing economies in order to spread the umbrella of organised credit in such economies. The issue of inflation targeting has been addressed by the central banks across the world. While some of the 
traditional central banking functions have been effectively hived off, the objective of achieving price stability and 
financial stability has assumed greater emphasis with the adoption of inflation targeting and promotion of financial 
markets development. Central banks around the world have been vested with a variety of additional 
responsibilities such as preparing macroeconomic data-bases, data dissemination, putting in place advanced 
clearing systems, coordinating with the international agencies, undertaking policy-oriented research activities and 
bridging gaps in information. 
 
Central Banking in India 
The primary functions of the Reserve Bank in the foundation phase (1935-1950) were : (a) issue of currency; (b) 
banker to the government; and (c) banker to other banks. Except in the sphere of agriculture, the Bank was not 
entrusted with any great promotional role in this period. In the realm of monetary policy, except for maintaining 
exchange rate stability, other functions such as the management of money supply or inflation were not s o 
important due to low levels of economic activity. As the bankers’ bank, the Reserve Bank was meeting seasonal 
requirements apart from being lender of last resort. The emphasis in these years was essentially on protecting 
depositors’ interests rather than on credit regulation. 
During the war and post-war years, the major preoccupation of the Bank was facilitation of war finance, 
repatriation of sterling debt and planning and administration of exchange control. The issues relating to regulation 
and supervision of banks came to occupy centre-stage in the backdrop of a number of bank failures. The Banking 
Companies Act was enacted in 1949 to empower the Reserve Bank with supervisory control over banks in order 
to ensure their establishment and operation along sound lines. The Reserve Bank of India was nationalised on 
January 1, 1949. 
With the launch of Five-Year Plans in 1951, the Reserve Bank’s functions became more diversified in terms of 
Plan financing, establishment of specialised institutions to promote savings and investment in the Indian economy 
and to meet credit requirements of the priority sectors. This was a novel feature for any central bank at that point 
of time. The Agricultural Refinance Corporation was set up in 1963 for extending medium and long-term finance 
to agriculture. Other institutional developments included setting up of the Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
(1948), the Industrial Development Bank of India (1964) and Unit Trust of India (1964). The role of monetary and 
credit policy in maintaining price stability was explicitly 
 
emphasised for the first time in the First Five Year Plan. Plan financing by the Reserve Bank evolved as deficit 
financing which took the form of system of issuance of ad hoc Treasury Bills. This arrangement of financing the 
Government was intended to be temporary but acquired a permanent character over time. 
Devaluation of the rupee in June 1966 and nationalisation of fourteen private sector banks in July 1969 multiplied 
the responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. The move helped to bridge the gaps in credit availability in many rural 
and urban areas and ensured sufficient funds availability to the preferred sectors. In terms of the outcome, this 
phase succeeded in mobilising private savings through the banks and paved the way for nationalisation of six 
more private sector banks in 1980. The breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of stable exchange rates got 
exacerbated by the oil shock of 1973-1974 and posed serious challenges for exchange rate management while 
creating balance of payments difficulties for India. For conserving foreign exchange reserves, the Government re-
examined the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, (FERA) 1947 and introduced changes in 1973 
which incorporated necessary changes for effective implementation of Government policy and removing 
difficulties in the working of the existing legislation. In the light of concerns about capital outflows, reinforced by 
repeated stress on balance of payments due to drought, war and oil shocks, the emphasis was placed on utilising 
domestic savings for domestic investment, while continuing to preserve foreign exchange reserves. During the 1980s, monetary policy assumed a new focus. The period was also marked by introduction of a formal 
monetary policy framework emerging out of the necessity for striking a balance between the developmental 
functions and price stability. With the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, there was a paradigm shift in the 
approach of monetary policy as also the foreign exchange management around the world. Influenced by this line 
of thinking, the concern about ever increasing fiscal deficit coupled with large scale increase in the money supply, 
led the Reserve Bank of India to appoint a Committee to Review the Working of Monetary System (Chairman: 
Sukhamoy Chakravarty). The Committee suggested that the monetary authority should embark on monetary 
targeting in a more formal manner. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank, for the first time evolved a ‘formal framework 
of monetary policy’ by the mid-1980s with M3 as a nominal anchor to be targeted, a policy framework that 
continued until recently. Further, the estimated expected level of bank credit was to be used for developing 
appropriate sectoral allocation in the light of the Plan priorities. This was closely followed by setting up of a 
Working Group on Money Market (Chairman: N. Vaghul). Based on its recommendations, a number of money 
market instruments were introduced such as 182-day Treasury Bills, inter-bank participation certificates (IBPC), 
certificates of deposit (CDs) and commercial paper (CP). The Discount and Finance House of India (DFHI) was 
set up in 1988 for promoting a secondary market in various money market instruments. 
The Bank’s efforts towards financing the credit needs of agriculture were strengthened with the setting up of 
NABARD in 1982. The expansionary banking network in terms of geographical coverage and heightened controls 
affected the quality of bank assets and strained their profitability. In the mid-1980s, a number of consolidation 
measures were initiated to strengthen the bank structures. A health code system was introduced for the banks in 
1985. A set of measures to provide greater operational flexibility to the banks were also put in place. 
Liberalisation and globalisation of the Indian economy initiated since 1991 (reform phase 1991-2005) added 
several new dimensions to the responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. Alongwith the financial sector reforms, the 
monetary policy framework has been fine-tuned and conventional central banking functions of currency 
management and payment and settlement 
 
systems have been revamped in tandem with the global trends and domestic needs. Increasing globalisation of 
the Indian economy necessitated integration of domestic markets with international financial markets for full 
realisation of the benefits of globalisation. The first phase of reforms, guided by recommendations of the 
Committee on Financial Systems (Narasimham Committee I) focused on deregulation of the banking industry, 
including permitting entry to new private sector banks; strengthening of the institutional framework for banking, 
non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) and financial institutions through prudential norms, capital adequacy 
stipulations, improvements in payments and settlement systems, and strengthening of the supervisory framework. 
The enforcement of complementary institutional measures included setting up of the Board for Financial 
Supervision (BFS) for strengthening the supervisory mechanism, recapitalisation of banks and improvements in 
debt recovery. The second phase of reforms (recommended by Narasimham Committee II) lays emphasis on 
improvement in prudential norms in a gradual move towards meeting the international standards. 
NBFCs, especially those involved in public deposit taking activities, have been brought under the regulation of the 
Reserve Bank of India. For regulatory convergence of entities involved in similar activities, prudential regulation 
and supervision norms have been introduced for development finance institutions and cooperative banks. The 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was established to regulate and supervise the 
insurance sector. The capital markets reform measures focused on improving market efficiency, increasing 
transparency, prevention of unfair practices, enhancing competitive conditions, minimising information 
asymmetries, developing modern technological infrastructure, reducing transaction costs and containing 
speculation in the securities market. Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) was established in 1992 as 
the regulator for equity markets. Further, Indian capital market was integrated with global markets by allowing 
Foreign Institutional Investors in 1992 and allowing Indian corporate sector to tap international capital markets 
through ADRs, GDRs, FCCBs and ECBs. In the debt market, the ad hoc Treasury Bills were phased out effective April 1, 1997 in terms of a historic 
agreement between the Reserve Bank and the Government. Interest rates on Government paper have been 
made market related and the maturity periods changed to reflect market preferences through auctions enabling 
market based price discovery. Open market operations (OMO), hitherto ineffective, gained considerable 
momentum. Collateralised borrowing and lending obligations (CBLOs) were operationalised as a money market 
instrument through the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) set up in 2003. A repo market outside the 
liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has been assiduously developed by the Reserve Bank to provide an avenue for 
bank and non-bank participants to trade funds after the conversion of the call/notice money market into a pure 
inter-bank market. 
On the external front, rupee value has been linked to the market forces. Current account convertibility was 
achieved in August 1994. FERA was repealed and replaced by a new legislation - Foreign Exchange 
Management Act (FEMA), in 1999. Further, the Exchange Control Department of the Reserve Bank was renamed 
as Foreign Exchange Department. Besides, a large number of innovative products and newer players have come 
to play active role and new hedging instruments have been introduced, viz., foreign currency-rupee options, etc. 
Authorised dealers could use cross-currency options, interest rate and currency swaps, caps/collars and forward 
rate agreements (FRAs) in the international forex market. 
In the context of monetary policy framework, there has been a greater focus on liquidity management 
engendered by the growing integration of financial markets, domestically and internationally. With the near total 
deregulation of interest rates, the Bank Rate has been reactivated since April 1997 as a reference rate and as a 
signaling device to reflect the stance of monetary policy. Following the recommendations of the Working Group 
on Money Supply: Analytics and Methodology of Compilation (Chairman: Y. V. Reddy), the Reserve Bank has 
commenced compilation and publication of  four monetary aggregates [M0 (monetary base), M1 (narrow money), 
M2 and M3 (broad money)]; and introduced three new liquidity aggregates (L1, L2 and L3) by incorporating 
deposits with post- office savings banks, term deposits, term borrowings and certificates of deposits of term 
lending and refinancing institutions and public deposits of non-banking financial institutions; broadening of the 
definition of credit by including items not reflected in the conventional bank credit; redefining the net foreign 
assets of the banking system to comprise banks’ holdings of foreign currency assets net of (a) their holdings of 
FCNR(B) deposits and (b) foreign currency borrowings. 
 
With the liberalisation of the external sector, the monetary targeting framework came under stress due to 
increasing liquidity mainly on account of increased capital inflows, necessitating a review of the monetary policy 
framework and the Reserve Bank switched over to a more broad-based “multiple indicators approach” since 1998 
in monetary policy formulation. The informal monetary policy strategy meetings review the monetary and liquidity 
conditions and the process has been made consultative. The Financial Markets Committee (FMC) monitors the 
developments in financial markets on a daily basis. The Committee makes quick assessment of the liquidity 
conditions and recommends strategies for intervention in the money and securities markets. 
The open market operations, repo and reverse repo operations have emerged as important liquidity management 
tools. Further, Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), which was introduced in June 2000, has emerged as the 
principal operating instrument of monetary policy, enabling the Reserve Bank to modulate short-term liquidity 
under varied financial market conditions. In order to fine-tune the management of liquidity and in response to 
suggestions from market participants, the Reserve Bank has introduced a Second Liquidity Adjustment Facility 
(SLAF) from November 28, 2005. Further, to address the dilemma of keeping a balance between the twin 
objectives of containing exchange rate volatility and maintenance of domestic price stability in the face of surging 
capital inflows, the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) was introduced in April 2004 to provide the Reserve Bank 
with an additional instrument of liquidity management. Under the MSS, the cost of sterilisation is borne by the 
Government. 
As part of management of the demand for currency, it has been the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to contain 
the volume of notes in circulation by coinising the lower denomination notes and conscious shift towards higher denomination notes in circulation. Major developments in this regard include following a ‘clean note policy’, 
mechanisation of note counting operations by the commercial banks, outsourcing of coin distribution to the 
private operators to ease pressure on distribution channels, regular reviews of security features of bank notes 
and mechanisation of destruction of soiled notes, etc. These operations are aimed at ensuring the optimal level of 
customer service through adequate supply of good quality and secure notes and coins in the country. 
Information Technology 
With the increasing globalisation and advances in technology, the payment and settlement systems, that form the 
backbone of economic activity in any modern society, need to be safe, sound and secure. The Reserve Bank has 
endeavoured to ensure full compliance with the core principles of the BIS in this area. The significant move in this 
direction is the introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system – aimed at reducing risks – especially 
settlement and systemic risks. New MICR based cheque processing centres have been set up at the commercial 
bank level, even as the settlement function continues to rest with the Reserve Bank. Further, the IT based 
initiatives have focussed on meeting the three pronged objective of better house keeping, improved customer 
service and overall systemic efficiency. The Reserve Bank has released a Financial Sector Technology Vision 
Document outlining the approach to be followed for IT implementation in the medium-term of about three years. 
Regulation and Supervision 
The regulation and supervision of the financial system in India is carried out by different regulatory authorities. 
The Reserve Bank regulates and supervises the major part of the financial system. The supervisory role of the 
Reserve Bank covers commercial banks, urban cooperative banks (UCBs), some financial institutions and non-
banking finance companies (NBFCs). Some of the financial institutions, in turn, regulate or supervise other 
institutions in the financial sector, for instance, Regional Rural Banks, and the cooperative banks are supervised 
by National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD); and housing finance companies by National 
Housing Bank (NHB). Department of Company Affairs (DCA), Government of India regulates deposit taking 
activities of corporates, other than NBFCs, registered under companies Act, but not those which are under 
separate statutes. The Registrar of Cooperatives (ROC) of different States in the case of single state 
cooperatives and the Central Government in the case of multi-state cooperatives are joint regulators, with the 
Reserve Bank for UCBs, and with NABARD for rural cooperatives. Whereas RBI and NABARD are concerned 
with the banking function of the cooperatives, management control rests with the State/Central Governments. 
This ‘dual control’ impacts the supervision and regulation of the cooperative banks. The Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority (IRDA) regulates the insurance sector; and the capital market, mutual funds, and 
other capital market intermediaries are regulated by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). 
With regard to the banking system of the country, the primary role of the Reserve Bank at inception was 
conceived as that of the lender of last resort. 
 
The bank failures of the mid-1930s brought forth the necessity of regulation of banking system. It, however, took 
the Reserve Bank of India and the Government a decade to put in place a comprehensive system of regulation 
and the Banking Companies Act, 1949 was enacted for the purpose. Further, in February 1950, it was decided 
that all banking companies would be inspected, irrespective of their size and standing. In 1961, the Reserve Bank 
reorganised and strengthened its inspection arrangements to cover many more branches than in the past. 
Between 1960 and 1968, the thrust of the regulatory and supervisory function of the Reserve Bank continued to 
be on ensuring soundness of operations of banks, consolidation and protection of the interests of the small 
depositors. The nationalisation of fourteen major commercial banks in 1969 was a turning point in the Indian 
banking system with the entry of the public sector. To strengthen the supervisory mechanism further, it was 
decided to institute a new type of inspection during 1977-78, viz., Annual Appraisal of banks in addition to the 
Financial Appraisal. The system of inspection of banks has been subjected to continuous scrutiny to ensure that 
the exercise serves the desired objectives. The massive expansion of the banking system had resulted in certain stresses and strains and in the middle of 
the 1980s the system entered into a phase of consolidation. Notwithstanding the remarkable progress made by 
the Indian banking system in achieving social goals during the 1980s, it experienced certain problems that led to 
decline in efficiency and productivity, and erosion of profitability. The decade of the 1990s was a watershed in the 
history of the Indian financial system in general and the banking system in particular. The urgency of reforms in 
the financial system was addressed by the Committee on the Financial System (Narasimham Committee, 1991) 
which looked into various issues with a view to initiating wide ranging financial sector reforms. Following the 
Report of the Committee, the Reserve Bank adopted a comprehensive approach on the reforms of the financial 
sector. Over the years, the regulatory and supervisory polices in India have transformed significantly in tandem 
with the global developments and the changing pace of the Indian financial system. Apart from on-site 
inspections, the Reserve Bank has adopted other three supervisory approaches, viz., off-site monitoring, internal 
control system in banks and use of external auditors. The Reserve Bank also initiated measures to implement 
Risk Based Supervision (RBS). The RBS process has been recently revisited by revising the risk profiling 
templates and introducing a new rating framework with a view to make the RBS process more risk-sensitive, 
objective and user-friendly. The Reserve Bank has initiated half-yearly discussion meetings with the Chief 
Executive Officers of the financial conglomerates (FCs) in association with other principal regulators to address 
outstanding issues/supervisory concerns, which would further strengthen the system of monitoring the FCs. 
In November 2004, the Reserve Bank revised the guidelines on ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC) principles in line 
with the recommendations made by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on standards for Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) and Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT). Further, the Indian banks are preparing to adopt 
the Basel II norms from March 2007, as directed by the Reserve Bank. Further, a Standing Technical Advisory 
Committee on Financial Regulation was constituted in November 2003 to strengthen the consultative process 
among banks, market participants and regulators of financial markets in the context of carrying forward India’s 
prudential regulatory system. The Reserve Bank had also constituted a Working Group on Conflict of Interest in 
the Indian Financial Services Sector to identify the sources and nature of potential conflicts, and suggest possible 
measures/ actions to be taken for mitigating them. The Task Force to address the issue of ‘duality of control’ over 
the cooperative institutions suggested to draw an Action Plan to redefine the roles and responsibilities and areas 
of regulation through delegation of powers in respect of all the players in the field. In view of the weaknesses 
persisting in the cooperative banks, a system of preparation of institution specific development action plans and 
execution of Memorandum of Understanding have been initiated since 2003-04. Further, a Task Force 
(Chairman: A. Vaidyanathan) was appointed in August 2004 to examine, inter alia, the issues relating to an 
appropriate regulatory framework for rural cooperative banking institutions. The recommendations of the Task 
Force have been accepted in principle by the Government. 
As a prudent step towards aligning the UCBs within the financial system, a Draft Vision Document (2005) of the 
Reserve Bank seeks to rationalise the existing regulatory and supervisory system; facilitate a focused system of 
supervision through enhancement of technology; and to evolve mechanism to address the dual control. 
For effective spervision of the NBFCs, a four-pronged mechanism comprising on-site inspection on the CAMELS 
pattern, viz., capital adequacy, assets management, earnings, liquidity, systems and procedures; off-site 
monitoring through periodic control returns using state-of-the-art information technology; an effective market 
intelligence network; and a system of submission of exception reports by statutory auditors of NBFCs were 
instituted in order to buttress the regulatory and supervisory framework for NBFCs. In order to bring the 
functioning of the NBFCs in line with international practices, the Reserve Bank initiated a consultative process 
with the NBFCs with regard to their plan of action for voluntarily phasing out of their acceptance of public deposits 
as prescribed in the mid-term review of Annual Policy 2004-05. Recently, the Reserve Bank has laid down a road 
map for Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs) with a view to ensure that the process of transition of these 
institutions complies with the Reserve Bank’s directions. In April 1995, select all-India financial institutions were brought under the supervisory purview of the BFS. All 
India financial institutions are being covered by an on-site supervisory process (CAMELS standards) since 1995 
on the lines of commercial banks. On-site and off-site surveillance system has been instituted for DFIs more or 
less on the lines of commercial banks. A major restructuring in the financial sector is evident in the recent 
conversion of ICICI and IDBI into banks. 
In sum, the changing role of financial regulation and supervision of the Reserve Bank focuses on prudential 
supervision, while emphasising the creation of an environment in which the banks think freely and innovate. More 
importance is being given to ‘principles’ and greater attention to ‘risk assessment and risk containment’. In future, 
the regulatory and supervisory role would not only be ‘friendly’ and ‘frank’, but also ‘prompt’ and ‘firm’. The 
changing face of regulation and supervision would accord importance to intensified use of technology in 
supervisory processes and substantially enhance the skills and capacities of the supervisors. While fully meeting 
the socio-economic objectives, it would continue to maintain stable and orderly conditions in the financial system. 
Financial Market Development 
A review of financial market development in India during the past seven decades reveals that the Reserve Bank 
has been successful in creating deep and vibrant money, Government securities and foreign exchange markets. 
Financial market development in India has, apart from improving monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
facilitated changes in monetary policy strategies: from emphasis on credit allocation to monetary targeting and 
the subsequent multiple indicator approach. The success of deregulation of the interest rate regime in India owes 
significantly to the simultaneous development of financial markets. Financial markets have enabled banks and 
institutions to better manage their liquidity and treasury operations and thereby strengthen their fund-based 
income and profitability. Further, the growth of financial markets in the 1990s contributed towards improved asset 
and liability management by banks and other financial entities. At the same time, there was a significant shift in 
the financing pattern of larger companies, which moved away from the banking system to raise resources from 
the financial markets. 
 
Though the various initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank have resulted in deep and wide money, Government 
securities and forex markets, the reform process continues. In the money market, the policy thrust of the Reserve 
Bank continues to be to encourage the development of collateralised market, broad-base the pool of securities to 
act as collateral for repo and CBLO markets and provide avenues for better risk management with further 
improvements in the ALM framework. In the Government securities market, in the FRBM environment, short-
selling with appropriate safeguards, developing “When Issued” market, active consolidation and ensuring 
effective debt management are likely to be some of the challenges facing the Reserve Bank. In the forex market, 
further liberalisation of the capital account in line with CACs recommendations could pose fresh challenges to the 
Reserve Bank. In the context of integration of the Indian financial markets with the global markets, the Reserve 
Bank has been constantly refining and fine-tuning its regulatory mechanism to align with the global standards. 
Notwithstanding the significant changes in financial markets, there are several imponderables which could have a 
bearing on monetary policy formulation. Some of the developments that are likely to have a bearing on the size 
and evolution of the money and Government securities markets in the coming years are implementation of the 
FRBM Act, 2003 (which will put an end to Reserve Bank’s participation in primary auctions of Central 
Government securities from April 1, 2006). While this would lead to functional separation of debt management 
from monetary operations thereby enabling the Reserve Bank to have greater control over the composition of its 
balance-sheet and flexibility in monetary operations, it would also call for greater coordination between the 
Reserve Bank and the Government for ensuring stability in the financial markets. In the context of the changed 
monetary and debt management scenario, the Reserve Bank has to take steps to fine-tune its open market 
operations and LAF. Greater accuracy in forecasting market liquidity over the short to medium-term has also 
become very crucial. 
 Another challenge confronting the Reserve Bank in the medium-term is the increasing openness of the Indian 
economy and the management of liquidity following strong capital inflows. As there is a trade-off  between the 
excessive volatility in financial markets, exchange rates and interest rates which are likely to result in erosion in 
the competitiveness of the economy on the one hand, and financial cost of sterilisation (measured as outgo of 
coupon on the sterilised amount over and above the earnings from deployment of foreign exchange reserves) on 
the other, the Reserve Bank has to properly balance its sterilisation operations. This would also call for fine-tuning 
of its policy instruments by the Reserve Bank so as to keep call money rates range bound (within the corridor of 
the repo and reverse repo rates). 
The liberalised financial system necessitates greater transparency, fostering strong institutions and developing 
better risk analysis systems. Improvements in market discipline also call for greater coordination between banks, 
major players in the financial markets and regulators. In order to have greater transparency in the financial 
position and risk profile of banks, India has been expanding the area of disclosures. Adoption of Basel II would 
improve risk management systems and enhance the competitiveness of Indian banks, thereby enabling them to 
play a more active role in global financial markets. In the area of monetary policy, the low and stable inflation 
coupled with very strong central banks have changed the monetary dynamics. Consequently, while rising inflation 
is no longer a major concern, excessive increase in asset prices and credit have emerged as major challenges 
facing the central banks as this can lead to financial instability. In the context of financial stability, besides 
improved transparency, better analysis of trends in major sectors of the economy and banks to detect stress, 
policies which better affect inflation expectations and cautious liberalisation of international capital movements 
have assumed significance. The Reserve Bank and other central banks have to pursue market driven strategies 
and policies that are stable and forward looking to anchor expectations. Fiscal discipline and deep and well 
functioning financial markets are necessary for the success of central bank’s policy strategy. 
Monetary and Fiscal Interface 
The Reserve Bank’s experience over the past seven decades on the issue of monetary and fiscal interface offers 
some useful insights. The Reserve Bank had to cope with the challenges thrown up by the changing phases of 
fiscal policy – from fiscal neutrality to fiscal dominance and further to fiscal consolidation - by suitably adapting the 
operating procedures of monetary policy and making institutional arrangements so as to foster monetary and 
financial stability. This was facilitated through a mutual agreement between the Reserve Bank and the 
Government to phase out automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit. Despite some improvement in the monetary 
fiscal interface, fiscal dominance persisted with growing market borrowings, necessitating the adoption of a 
strategy of appropriately combining devolvement/private placements with open market operations in order to 
contain the cost of Government borrowings. 
The opening up of the economy posed new challenges in the conduct of monetary policy. While the Reserve 
Bank has been empowered with greater instrument autonomy, the exchange rate adjustment has essentially 
been market-driven with episodic interventions to counter self-fulfilling speculative activities. However, the 
opening up of the capital account has been calibrated sequentially which, as evident from the East Asian Crisis, 
has turned out to be prudent. The Reserve Bank, being at the helm of money, Government securities and foreign 
exchange markets, could balance diverse considerations of interest rate and exchange rate stability through 
appropriate market interventions and interest rate signals. The Reserve Bank could carefully craft its debt 
management policy so as to simultaneously meet the objectives of minimising cost as well as reducing rollover 
risks of Government borrowings through elongation of maturity of Government paper. Thus, the Reserve Bank 
has been successful in meeting the challenges of debt management, while ensuring orderly financial market 
conditions. 
As per the FRBM stipulations, the Reserve Bank would not be participating in the primary market auctions 
effective April 1, 2006. This would be in tune with the traditional argument that the power to spend money should 
be separated from the power to create money (Reddy, 2001). While the withdrawal of the Reserve Bank will impart greater functional autonomy to monetary policy, the Reserve Bank will have to keep a vigil on interest rate 
uncertainties and create alternate financing mechanism for ensuring successful completion of the Government’s 
market borrowing programme. With high levels of public debt in India, the case for a separation of monetary and 
debt management seems to be gaining ground. Given the complexities in separating the function of monetary 
and debt management, a minimum requirement should be that their relationships and transactions be reported as 
transparently as possible (Reddy, 2001). In the event of a functional separation, greater explicit coordination 
between the monetary and the debt authorities would be required to resolve policy dilemmas of simultaneously 
undertaking exchange rate, monetary and debt management, which the Reserve Bank has hitherto addressed by 
virtue of being vested with all three responsibilities. The key to successful monetary fiscal coordination is the 
realisation by the fiscal authorities that the control over deficits reins inflation expectations thereby facilitating the 
conduct of monetary policy. Thus, if inflation expectations are anchored at low levels, a proactive monetary policy 
can ensure a stable and low interest rate regime that is conducive to maintaining the momentum of economic 
growth, while facilitating the task of public debt management. 
Reserve Bank Balance Sheet 
Analysis of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet over the last seven decades reveals the correlation of its evolution 
to shifts in the policy regime as well as changes in the macroeconomic environment. The balance sheet of the 
Bank has undergone considerable changes from the primacy of the note issuance function during the formative 
years, to slow but steady fiscal ascendancy during the early phase of planning which culminated into a period of 
fiscal dominance (and higher pre-emption of the resources of the banking system) coupled with strong 
developmental role. Further, there is a structural transformation in the 1990s with dominance of foreign assets, 
market determination of public debt management and reduction in reserve requirements. 
With the recent compositional shift in the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet towards foreign currency assets and the 
resultant shift in the risk-return profile of the Bank, the concerns of the balace sheet being exposed to interest and 
exchange rate risks with attendant valuation implications assume greater significance.With the change in asset 
composition of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet, relatively lower rate of return on foreign currency assets, 
volatility in exchange and interest rates in the global markets and adoption of mark to market valuation norms with 
asymmetric treatment for appreciation gains, various risks, viz., market risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, risks arising 
out of intervention operations, operational risk and lender of last resort risk, have assumed greater significance in 
the context of the health of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet and have intensified the need for adoption of 
effective and adequate risk management measures. The volatility in financial asset prices during the deregulation 
phase has had a bearing on the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank to the extent that it is asymmetric in terms of 
its impact on assets and liabilities. In the wake of these developments, the Bank has initiated several measures to 
ensure revaluation of both domestic and foreign assets on a prudent basis and also build up adequate cushion in 
the form of contingency reserves so as to impart policy flexibility in a liberalised environment. 
The issue of sterilised intervention is relevant in the context of the Reserve Bank because it manages foreign 
exchange reserves and absorbs the valuation impact of exchange and interest rate movements in the 
international market. 
 
While per se sterilised intervention involves adjustment within the assets side of the Reserve Bank’s balance 
sheet (in terms of substitution of domestic assets by foreign assets), recent instruments such as market 
stabilisation bonds, though innovative, cause an expansion of the balance sheet. Such an expansion of the 
balance sheet may necessitate corresponding increase in contingency reserves. Thus, in times to come, a 
contextual analysis of transfer of surplus and provision of contingency reserves would be needed in the wake of 
appropriate risk management strategy on the part of the Reserve Bank. 
While the Reserve Bank has continued to conduct banking business of the Government, the view that has gained 
prominence is that the Reserve Bank should assign the retail banking business of the Government in favour of 
the agency banks with a view to ensuring that in the long run, the Bank will maintain only the principal accounts of the Government, leaving the day to day banking business to commercial banks functioning as its agents (Reddy, 
2002). Another issue under consideration relates to the cost of conducting State Government business. Under 
the existing arrangement, the Bank is not entitled to receive any remuneration for the conduct of ordinary banking 
business of the Government other than such advantage that may accrue to it from holding of cash balances free 
of obligation to pay interest thereof. Furthermore, the Reserve Bank incurs expenditure in terms of reimbursement 
of costs incurred by agency banks for conducting Government business. Country practices also reveal that the 
cost of conducting Government business in most countries is borne by the respective Governments and not the 
central banks. A rationalisation measure being contemplated in respect of remuneration payment to agency 
banks is to shift from the present cost based system to a system of bidding for Government business by agency 
banks. 
Finally, the balance sheet of a central bank needs to adhere to the principles of sound central banking ensuring 
price and financial stability on the one hand, and its developmental role on the other. Transparency is a 
necessary precondition in this regard. A transparent central bank balance sheet would go a long way to enhance 
the credibility of the central bank and efficiency of monetary policy. The evolution of balance sheet of the Reserve 
Bank over seven decades bears testimony to these principles. 
Organisational Evolution and Strategic Planning 
The organisational evolution of the Reserve Bank of India took place in response to the functions which devolved 
on the Bank as the socioeconomic conditions unfolded. The focus on rural finance, development of cooperatives, 
necessity of credit allocation to the preferred sectors, need for economic research in the post-war period and 
weak bank failures, etc., facilitated creation of a diversified edifice to respond to the changing environment. 
Financial stability, though not an explicit element in the Preamble to the RBI Act, 1934, always remained a core 
objective underpinning policy actions of the Reserve Bank from time to time. The organisational restructuring was 
undertaken in view of the evolving socioeconomic conditions. The Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) was set 
up to put in place an integrated supervisory mechanism. To cope with the financial markets dynamism, a number 
of Departments were created such as the Department of External Investments and Operations, Internal Debt 
Management Department, Monetary Policy Department, and more recently, the Financial Markets Department. 
The thrust through the changing phases has been to move alongwith the emerging macroeconomic scenario and 
to cope with the crisis situations in a pragmatic manner. Although the Reserve Bank did not adopt any systematic 
strategic planning process, it could undertake the transformation from time to time on account of its ability to 
leverage the skills of its staff. The adoption of Strategic Action Plan (SAP) that is under consideration for 
implementation, however, poses the dilemma of either to be bound by a set model of planning or adapt to the 
changes as they come in the backdrop of rapid economic transformation that calls for far quicker responses than 
ever before. 
 
Communication Policy 
Transparency has assumed renewed focus with a clear communication policy of the Reserve Bank, which 
enables it to disseminate a wide range of information regularly to the public. In recent years, the Reserve Bank 
has been laying emphasis on a well-designed communication policy with three main features - transparency, 
timeliness and credibility. The objective of the communication policy is achieved through extensive dissemination 
of information on the policy and the processes of its formation. The Reserve Bank extensively uses its website for 
dissemination of information. The publications of the Reserve Bank, also available on the website, containing 
data, research studies and speeches of top-management of the Reserve Bank provide rationale and explanations 
behind the policy decisions. In an interesting development in recent years, the Reserve Bank regularly solicits 
feedback on important issues placed on its website. 
In sum, the evolution of central banking, not only in India but also globally, indicates that the central banks have 
continued to adapt to the changing economic environment. In the interaction between the financial intermediaries and the central bank, the focus has been the welfare of the general public. The central banks carefully watch the 
market trends and monitor numerous variables, both quantity and rates, in the domestic and global economy. The 
information contained in these indicators and the direct feedback from the market participants helps in calibrating 
and crafting an appropriate monetary policy to ensure financial stability. In the last hundred years, a period of 
time when most central banks were established, the markets, the objectives and instruments of monetary policy 
have changed. Despite these changes, the central banks have established themselves as necessary and 
permanent part of the financial system. 
The Reserve Bank has had a fair degree of success in achieving the twin objectives of growth with stability, 
especially in the post-reform period. The well calibrated strategies of the Reserve Bank in refining monetary 
policy operating procedures, managing the capital flows, ensuring evolution of competitive markets and 
sustaining a healthy financial system, while also performing the developmental role have yielded visible results. 
While successfully facing the challenges of globalisation, the Reserve Bank has earned international credibility in 
terms of efficacy of its policies. The Reserve Bank has achieved transparency in its operations, especially in 
terms of evolving communication policy aimed at addressing a wide range of audiences. Notwithstanding the 
changing challenges of different regimes, the Reserve Bank has managed to evolve constructively on a 
continuous basis to cope with demands for stable macroeconomic management and financial stability, while 
meeting the objectives of economic growth and development. As the economy becomes increasingly open and 
global, the role of the Reserve Bank will undergo further change and it will need to equip itself for coping with 
these emerging challenges on a continuous basis. 
 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
Press Release: 2005-2006/1184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 