 DRAFT PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 7, 2006.
th
18 Conference of State Finance Secretaries
th
The 18 Conference of the State Finance Secretaries was held in the
Reserve Bank of India in Mumbai today. Finance Secretaries of 20 States
participated. Senior officials from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India and
representatives from Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Controller
General of Accounts attended the Conference. Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve
Bank of India inaugurated the Conference.
The Reserve Bank has been, since 1997, organising the State Finance
Secretaries' Conference twice a year. The Conference all through has provided a
very useful forum for interactions among State Finance Secretaries, senior officials
of Government of India, Planning Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General, and
the Reserve Bank of India. The State Finance Secretaries play a key role in the
development process of their respective States and strive to achieve transparency,
stability, fairness and efficiency in the conduct of fiscal policies. The deliberations in
the past Conferences have served to arrive at a consensus on various issues in
furtherance of better financial management and fiscal prudence in the States.
Today's Conference aimed to take this consultative process further. Apart
from an assessment of the market borrowing programme of the State Governments
and operational issues pertaining to Government transactions, the discussions
primarily focussed on issues relating to computerisation of treasuries, underwriting in
respect of open market loans and management of open market borrowings of the
State Governments.
                                                                                                    Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/190