PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 26, 2006
RBI releases Report of the Working Group on
Cost of NRI remittances
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today placed on its website (www.rbi.org.in)  the
Report of the Working Group on the Cost of Non-Resident Indian (NRI) Remittances.
The Report was submitted to the Reserve Bank of India on August 29, 2006. Views /
suggestions on the recommendations of the Group may please be sent to the Chief
th
General Manager-in-Charge, Foreign Exchange Department, 11 floor, Central Office
Building, Reserve Bank of India, Fort, Mumbai-400 001 or faxed at 022-2266 1722 or e-
mailed at neenajain@rbi.org.in within 15 days.
In the Annual Policy announced in April 2006, it was observed that remittances
from NRIs constituted a significant segment of the country's foreign exchange flows but
there were concerns on the relatively high cost of remittance faced by the migrants
specially for small value remittances. In this context, an External Working Group under
the chairmanship of Chief Executive of the Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association of
India (FEDAI), with representatives from Bank of Baroda, Citibank N. A., The Hongkong
and Shanghai Banking Corporation Ltd., ICICI Bank Limited and State Bank of India
was constituted to look into the components that go into pricing of remittances into
India. Apart from this, the Group was also asked to compare the price structure with the
cost of remittances made out of India and identify elements that result in additional cost.
The Group has made several recommendations; most significant being that
banks in India should review their existing scale of charges both at the foreign end and
in the domestic centres and resort to latest technology for handling large volume of
transactions. Second, banks may improve their infrastructure by extending the scope of
existing electronic transfer facilities like the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) or
setting up Centralised Remittance Receiving Centres and widening the scope of
Exchange Houses. Third, Indian banks should explore tie-ups with more correspondent
banks which would bring down the cost for the NRIs at the foreign centres. Fourth, the
Group has suggested that the cap on number of branches of Indian banks with drawal
arrangements with Exchange Houses may be reviewed. Finally, NRIs may be advised
to route their remittances through a branch of an Indian bank or a foreign bank having a
branch in India. NRIs should be advised, as far as possible, to convert foreign
currencies into Indian Rupees at the Indian end to get the benefit of a better exchange
rate. The recommendations of the Group would be examined for such action as deemed
necessary to refine the cost and mode of remittance facilities.
Alpana Killawala
 Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/ 433