PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 3, 2006
Governor Addresses the First Meeting of the Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India
The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) held its first meeting
in Mumbai today. The BCSBI was registered on February 18, 2006 in Mumbai under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860. The management of the Board has been
entrusted to a Governing Council under the Chairmanship of Smt. K.J. Udeshi, a
former central banker. Other members of the Governing Council are Shri M.G. Bhide,
(Banker), Shri M.M. Chitale, (Chartered Accountant), Shri R.K. Krishna Kumar
(Service Industry Representative), Shri S. Diwakara (Depositors’ Representative) and
Shri S. R. Kolarkar, (Legal).  Shri Vinay Baijal, CGM, Reserve Bank of India will be the
Chief Executive Officer of the BCSBI.
The Board functions as an autonomous, independent body to effectively
monitor and assess the compliance with codes and standards which the banks agree
to. The registration of banks with the BCSBI, as members, enables the Reserve Bank
of India to derive greater supervisory comfort. With a view to lending support to this
collaborative initiative of banks, the Reserve Bank has agreed to finance the entire
expenses of the BCSBI for the first five years of its functioning.
In his address to the members of the Board at its first meeting of the Dr. Y V
Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India mentioned that though the general
perception was that the liberalisation of the financial sector would induce competition
which in turn would ensure good quality of customer service to the common person, in
practice it had not come about in the manner it was expected. It was in this context
that the Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit of Public Services
(Chairman, Shri S. S. Tarapore) was constituted by the Reserve Bank of India in 2003
to address the issues relating to availability of adequate banking services to the
common man. The Committee had, inter alia, observed an institutional gap for
measuring the performance of the banks against codes and standards based on
established best practices. The Committee had, therefore, recommended setting up of
the BCSBI. In the context of improving the quality of customer service, Governor
pointed out that at times there were ambiguities in the regulatory guidelines issued by
the Reserve Bank of India while in many more cases the operational procedures and
practices adopted by the bank come in the way of rendering efficient customer
services. He mentioned that while the Banking Ombudsman Scheme has already
been revamped in the recent past by the Reserve Bank, the establishment of the
BCSBI was in the nature of creating a self-regulatory organisation in the larger interest
of improving the quality of customer services by the Indian banking system. The
system of registration of individual banks with the BCSBI would also enable to
accommodate the bank-specific differences in the customer service related
benchmarks set by the banks for themselves. He emphasised that the Board would be2
an autonomous, independent body except that in the initial years,  the Reserve Bank
would provide the funding. He welcomed the Board to share any information which it
may consider appropriate to bring to the notice of the Reserve Bank as a regulator
and supervisor of the banking system. The Governor also placed on record the
appreciation of the full support received from the Hon'ble Finance Minister and the
Government of India in this initiative of the Reserve Bank. On its part, within the
Reserve Bank of India, the Banking Ombudsman Scheme and the aspects relating to
customer service had been carved out separately from the regulatory and supervisory
function so as to obviate any potential conflict. The Governor also thanked the
Chairperson and the members of the Board who had so kindly agreed to serve on the
Board.
The members of the Board expressed their happiness to have an opportunity of
being associated with the Board which will help them raise the standard of customer
services in the country. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Indian Banks'
Association (IBA) welcomed the establishment of BCSBI which he hoped would
ensure that all customers of the banking system are treated fairly. He also mentioned
that while the IBA will have the ownership of the Code of Banking Practices being
evolved for the banks, the BCSBI would look into the ground level practices and
assess the overall compliance of the banks with the Code of Banking Practices. Some
of the members mentioned that the close involvement of the central bank in securing
higher standards of customer services in the banking sector was in tune with the latest
international trend in this regard where the central banks and the banking regulators
were getting increasingly involved in securing high standards of customer service to
the consumer of financial services.
G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1115