PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
          April 4, 2006
RBI releases Report of Advisory Committee on WMA
Under Section 17(5) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Reserve
Bank provides Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to States. The facility is to help
States tide over temporary mismatches in cash flow of their receipts and payments.
There are two types of WMA - Normal and Special.  While Normal WMA are clean
advances, Special WMA are secured advances provided against the pledge of
Government of India securities.  At present, the Normal WMA for a State is
computed on the basis of latest three-year average of revenue receipts as per the
formula recommended by the Advisory Committee on Ways and Means Advances to
State Governments (Ramachandran Committee - 2003).
The Ramchandran Committee had recommended that the formula and the
limits of WMA may be reviewed in totality after the receipt of the recommendations of
the Twelfth Finance Committee (TFC). The TFC report was tabled in the Parliament
on February 26, 2005. In accordance with the recommendations of the
Ramachandran Committee and in the context of the fiscal developments in the
interregnum as well as the outlook for the liquidity position of the State Governments
over the medium term, an Advisory Committee to review the WMA Scheme was
constituted in April 2005. The Committee comprised Shri M. P. Bezbaruah, then
Banking Ombudsman, New Delhi, as Chairman, Prof. D. K. Srivastava, Director,
Madras School of Economics, and member of the Twelfth Finance Commission, as
Member, and Shri B. Mahapatra, the then Chief General Manager-in-Charge,
Internal Debt Management Department (IDMD), RBI, as Member-Secretary.
The Committee followed, in line with past practices, a consultative approach
in framing its recommendation.  Accordingly, a questionnaire was issued to the 26
State Governments that have WMA arrangements with RBI on various aspects of the
WMA/OD Scheme. The Committee also had discussions with the Finance
Secretaries of the State Governments apart from senior officials of the Government
of India, academicians and experts.
The Report of the Committee was submitted to the Reserve Bank on October
29, 2005.  The Report was discussed in the 17th Conference of State Finance
Secretaries held at the Reserve Bank of India on January 13, 2006.
An edited version of the Report of the Committee has been placed on the
website of the Reserve Bank of India (www.rbi.org.in).
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1275