PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 12, 2006
RBI's Rajbhasha Shield Awards Ceremony
Greater emphasis is laid on customer service and better communication through
the common man's language. Hindi, being the official language and a commonly
understood language in most of the states, is being used by banks in India, in their day-
to-day operations helping immensely in providing better customer service. Even in
marketing their services and products banks and companies are using Hindi effectively.
Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India while awarding the shields for the year
2004-2005, said that we should think seriously about that greater section of customers
that does not know English. I agree that immediately, it is not possible to start working in
Hindi only but we can certainly work in local language and Hindi with a plan chalked out
in advance. The award for the best "House Journal" and the winners of the "Inter Bank
Essay Competitions" were presented.
The annual Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield was instituted in 1980 to encourage
public sector banks to use Hindi in their day-to-day working. Along with the scheme, the
Reserve Bank also conducts a competition for the house journals of banks and financial
institutions. The Reserve Bank has also initiated an Inter Bank Hindi Essay Competition
from 2002-03.
Shri V.Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank, while complimenting the
winning  banks and financial institutions noted that in democracy the language of public
and government should be one and the day-to-day affairs must be conducted in the
same language which the public understands. He also added that taking into account
the multilingual character of the nation, use of Hindi should be propelled with  inspiration
and encouragement, we have to bring a change in our attitude and ourselves work in
Hindi so as to encourage others.
Earlier, Shri V.K.Sharma, Executive Director welcomed the Chief Executives of
banks and financial institutions, Shri H.N.Prasad, Principal Chief General Manager,
Department of Administration and Personnel Management, Reserve Bank of India,
proposed a vote of thanks. Shri Ramakant Sharma, Deputy General Manager,
Rajbhasha Department of the Reserve Bank of India conducted the programme.
The function was attended by the chairmen and other senior executives of the
banks and financial institutions.
   G.Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/  57