PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 18, 2006
PM releases RBI’s History Volumes and inaugurates
RBI’s Centre for Advanced Financial Learning
Dr. Manmohan Singh, the Honourable Prime Minister of India today released the
third volume of the history of the Reserve Bank of India. The volume, released at the
Reserve Bank of India in Mumbai, covers the period between 1967 and 1981. Dr.
Manmohan Singh also inaugurated the Centre for Advanced Financial Learning of the
Reserve Bank. Dr. Manmohan Singh, former Governor of the Reserve Bank, is the first
Indian Prime Minister to visit the Reserve Bank and to address a special meeting of its
Central Board.
The occasion also marked completion of seventy years of existence of the
Reserve Bank of India.
To commemorate the occasion, Shri P Chidambaram, the Union Finance Minister,
released the Reserve Bank of India’s annual Report on Currency and Finance for 2004-
2005. To synchronise with the history of the Reserve Bank, the theme of this Report is
“Evolution of Central Banking in India”.
The function was attended by Shri S M Krishna, the Governor of Maharashtra and
Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Honourable Chief Minister of Maharashtra. Six Governors past
and present - of the Reserve Bank of India attended the function. Members of the Central
Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank, senior members of staff, and others associated
with the history project and members of the committee for makeover of the Bankers’
Training College were among the special invitees at the function.
Established in 1935, the Reserve Bank of India completed 70 years of its
existence in 2005. The third volume of its history, covering period 1967 to 1981, has been
published along with the earlier two volumes to commemorate this occasion. The first
volume covering the period from 1935 to 1951 and the second volume covering the
period 1951 to 1967 were published earlier. The three volumes have been published
once again as a set to facilitate the reader to capture the evolving phase of the Reserve
Bank over a 46-year period of its development. The Report on Currency and Finance of
2004-2005 released simultaneously today, by focussing thematically on the evolution of
central banking in India, is expected to help the reader get a perspective on the Reserve
Bank of India over the 70-year period of its existence.
The Centre for Advanced Financial Learning, which was inaugurated by the
Prime Minister today is a relaunching of the Bankers Training College, a 50-year old
training establishment of the Reserve Bank of India that has contributed significantly
towards building skills among commercial and central bankers. Recognising the many
changes that have taken place in the financial sector the underlying purpose of the
new Centre is to provide a broad based intellectual platform for research, training and
discussion for senior executives and professionals in the financial sector, both Indian
and foreign.The Prime Minister fondly remembered his tenure at the Reserve Bank of India
and commended the role of the central bank by recounting the words he had said as the
Governor of the Reserve Bank: "The policies of a country's central bank and monetary
authority have profound implications for the functioning of any modern
economy…objectives of our monetary and credit policies have to be consistent with the
nation's overall social and economic objectives". Viewed from this perspective, the
Reserve Bank has contributed to economic growth and employment generation in the
economy through maintenance of price and financial stability while ensuring adequate
availability of credit to various sections of the society, he said. In addition, the Reserve
Bank has also successfully discharged its non-traditional responsibilities such as the
development of agricultural credit, rural co-operatives and development finance
institutions. These facets of the Reserve Bank's role are well documented in the history
volumes being released today, he added.
Pointing out that Mumbai with all its inherent advantages in terms of human capital
and commercial acumen can be positioned as a viable Regional Financial Centre, the
Prime Minister urged that work towards this objective should be undertaken. He further
urged the Finance Minister and the Reserve Bank to revisit the subject of capital account
convertibility and come out with a roadmap based on current realities. The Prime Minister
added that progress in this regard will facilitate the transformation of Mumbai into not only
a Regional but also a Global Financial centre.
The Finance Minister while releasing the Report on Currency and Finance
commended the effort and stated that the theme of evolution of central banking befitted
the occasion as the concept of central banking in India and the world is under
transformation. Stating that in India the financial sector reforms were an integral part of
the economic reforms since 1990s, the Finance Minister appreciated the role the Reserve
Bank of India has played in modernising the banking infrastructure and in making it
competitive to bring it in line with the global competition. The Finance Minister expressed
satisfaction that the Reserve Bank has been successful in meeting its objective of
ensuring price stability and financial stability in the economy while contributing to
economic growth through channelising credit to productive sector. He added that as India
embarks on the higher growth path as indicated by the Prime Minister, the financial
sector will have to play a crucial role in garnering resources from the savers and
allocating them efficiently for productive uses. Some recent RBI instructions such as
financial inclusion, guidelines for issue of credit cards, managing the demand for
currency, and clean note policy, should be seen in this context, he said. The Finance
Minister also highlighted the need for maintaining confidence of the domestic and global
investors in the country’s capital market. He further stressed that it was necessary to
address the inter-relationship with the rest of the architectural framework of the financial
sector which was not fully integrated. As the economy became more open, he expected
that the path of continuous change that the Reserve Bank had exhibited over the last 70
years, would continue for at least another 70 years and beyond.
Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, proposed a special vote of thanks to all
distinguished guests.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1186