CREDIT TO FARMERS
1. Context and Perception
There is a perception that credit to farmers is priced higher than
commensurate with the level of properly-assessed risk. This is a perception that
has been articulated by the Reserve Bank also in the recent past (See Annex).
The budget measures are thus contextually relevant.
It may be noted that the main thrust of the budget announcement is to
provide some relief to farmers through fiscal measures rather than cross-
subsidisation within the banking sector.
2. Way forward
Reserve Bank has already commenced implementation of the relevant
budget measures, while ensuring the commercial viability of banks and the
overall soundness of the credit system.
The recent initiatives taken by commercial banks including in technology
and processing practices are expected to increase their lending to the
agricultural sector and in particular, induce pricing of credit most appropriate to
the credit record at micro levels. The banks which have started assessing the
commercial potential of agriculture should focus on meeting the needs of
diversified agriculture and equip their branches and streamline procedures
appropriately. Reorientation of skill, attitudes and systems is critical to
appropriate pricing of credit. The implementation of the recommendations of the
Vaidyanathan Committee (I & II) is expected to revive the rural cooperative credit
structure and reduce the cost of multi- layering. At the same time, in the area of
micro finance, banks are stepping up significantly their exposure to SHGs, and
will also be taking increased recourse to micro finance institutions and post
offices as agents to widen and deepen their outreach. Setting up of a Committee
on Financial Inclusion has been announced by the Finance Minister. All these
measures can be expected to lead to structural, policy, and procedural changes
required to facilitate sustained delivery of financial services in the rural areas at
reasonable cost.
Progress in these areas with full cooperation of the banking system
should facilitate the flow of credit at reasonable terms to the farmers, paving the
way for phasing out subsidisation of interest rates.Annex
The RBI’s approach to agricultural credit especially access to credit has
been articulated in the various policy statements including mid term review,
annual policy statements, etc. To quote :
Mid-Term Review 2003-04
Trends in the flow and composition of savings as well as availability of
credit to some highly productive and socially critical sectors should be a matter
of importance to all in the financial system. While credible actions, particularly by
the commercial banks, would be essential, innovative measures by all concerned
may have to be considered in due course if adequate progress in credit delivery
accompanied by appropriate transparency in credit pricing is not observed soon.
(para 52)
Annual Policy Review 2004-05
While credible actions, particularly by the commercial banks, would be
essential, innovative measures by all concerned would have to be considered in
due course to ensure adequate progress in credit delivery accompanied by
appropriate transparency in credit pricing. (para 66)
While there is intense competition among banks to lend to large top-rated
borrowers, other borrowers with long-standing relationship with banks and good
credit record do not get the benefit of lower rates. It is considered desirable that
banks should align the pricing of credit to assessment of credit risk so that credit
delivery and credit culture is improved. (para 78)
Mid-Term Review 2005-06
With a view to ensuring financial inclusion of all segments of the
population, in both rural and urban areas, a comprehensive framework to revive
the cooperative credit system, revitalise the regional rural banks (RRBs) and
reorient commercial banking towards the credit-disadvantaged sections of
society assumes high priority. (para 57)
There is a public perception that there is underpricing of credit for
corporates while there could be overpricing of lending to agriculture and small
and medium enterprises. (para 61)
Some actions taken
The Reserve Bank of India has taken several actions to facilitate the
stepping up of credit at reasonable interest rates to the agricultural sector and
rural areas. These include :
• Revitalisation of RRBs
• Measures to improve financial inclusion in rural and under-banked areas,
and
• Allowing banks to use intermediaries for providing micro savings and
micro credit products.