PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 12, 2006
RBI releases Discussion Paper on
Construction of Harmonised Index of CPI
The Reserve Bank of India has today released on its website a discussion
paper on construction of harmonised index of consumer prices in India. The
discussion paper has been prepared by the Reserve Bank of India's Department of
Statistical Analysis and Computer Services.
In India, Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is widely used as a measure of inflation
for policy purposes and other macro-analysis, though, internationally, Consumer
Price Index (CPI) is considered as a suitable measure of inflation and is used as the
main yardstick for monitoring price stability in retail market.
There are four distinct CPI measures compiled in India, for different reference
population groups. The four CPI measures are Consumer Price Index for Industrial
Workers (CPI-IW); Urban Non-Manual Employees (CPI-UNME); Agricultural
Labourers (CPI-AL); and Rural Labourers (CPI-RL). These are complied on a
monthly basis for major centers along with All-India indices for a limited or specific
purposes, such as, wage settlement. Ideally, a measure of inflation should cover the
entire gamut of goods and services, being purchased by a consumer in the domestic
market and should represent the entire spectrum of population in a country.  Thus,
there had been a long felt need to develop a measure of CPI, which can meet these
objectives.
The paper suggests a methodology to construct a harmonised index of
consumer prices (HICP) based on existing three CPI series(CPI-IW, CPI-UNME, CPI-
RL). The paper recognises that such an HICP may not be an appropriate surrogate of
population groups, but possibly could be considered as the next alternative for it.
This paper explores construction of a harmonised index of consumer prices in the
light of the past empirical exercise in the Indian context and the present state of
availability of data. Broadly, the results of HICP are a reflection of the movements in
the three CPIs at the aggregate level.  In view of the limitations outlined in the paper,
however, the results need to be interpreted cautiously.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/512 