PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
  January 25, 2006
RBI sets up a Committee on Financial Sector Plan for NE Region
In order to achieve greater financial inclusion and provision of financial services
in the North Eastern (NE) region and also to prepare an appropriate as well as
monitorable action plan for the region, the Reserve Bank of India has set up a
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, Smt. Usha Thorat.
The Committee would review the action taken so far for extending banking
coverage and increasing the flow of credit in the North Eastern Region, identify
bottlenecks in the extension of financial services, in particular, timely and smooth flow of
credit in the region. It would suggest measures, in particular, relating to the processes
as well as procedures keeping in view the special circumstances, such as land tenure
rights to overcome the impediments in financial inclusion, and enable greater flow of
credit, further, the committee would draw up Statewise action plan appropriate to local
conditions in each of the States and consider matters relevant to the above and
recommend appropriate actions on them.
The Committee is expected to submit its report in three months.
The other members on the Committee are:
Shri H S Das, Commissioner & Secretary, Finance Department, Government of
Assam
Shri Tabom Bam, Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, Finance & Planning,
Government of Arunachal Pradesh
Shri S K Tewari, Additional Chief Secretary, Government  of Meghalaya
Shri J K Ramthang, Secretary, Industries Department, Government  of Mizoram
Shri H K Khulu, Commissioner Finance, Government of Nagaland
Shri H. Deleep Singh, Director, Institutional Finance, Government of Manipur
Dr. G S G Ayyangar, Commissioner & Secretary, Rural Development and
Agriculture,  Government of Tripura
Dr. Y S P Thorat, Managing Director, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development
Shri N Balasubramanian, Chairman and Managing Director, Small Industries
Development Bank of India
Shri P K Gupta, Chairman and Managing Director, National Housing Bank and
United Bank of IndiaShri P B Lahiri, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India, Local Head Office,
Guwahati
Dr. P J Nayak, Chairman, UTI Bank Ltd.
Shri K N Hazarika, Chairman and Managing Director, North Eastern
Development Finance Corporation Ltd. (NEDFi)
Prof. Madhurjya Bezbaruah, Head, Economic Department, Guwahati University
Dr. Amarendra Sahoo, Regional Director, Reserve Bank of India, Guwahati,
Member Secretary
Shri Ashok Kini (Former Managing Director, State Bank of India) will be an
Advisor and Permanent invitee and Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve
Bank of India will be a permanent invitee.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/947