PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 4, 2006
RBI issues Guidelines for Relief Measures
to Avian Flu-affected Poultry Industry
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today issued guidelines to banks for relief
measures to Avian Flu-affected poultry industry. Keeping in view the loss of income
that occurred due to culling of birds as well as steep fall in the demand for poultry
products and their prices on account of outbreak of Avian Influenza (bird flu) in some
areas of the country, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to consider extending
certain facilities to poultry units financed by them.
In its circular issued to all scheduled commercial banks, the Reserve Bank has
asked banks to consider extending the following facilities to poultry units financed by
them:
(i) Principal and interest due on working capital loans as also instalments and
interest on term loans which have fallen due for payment on/after the
onset of bird flu, i.e., February 1, 2006 and remaining unpaid may be
converted into term loans. The converted loans may be recovered in
installments based on projected future inflows over a period up to three
years with an initial moratorium of up to one year.
(ii) The remaining portion of term loan may be rescheduled with a moratorium
period up to one year depending upon the cash flow generating capacity
of the unit.
(iii) The reschedulement/conversion may be completed on or before June 30,
2006.
(iv)  The rescheduled/converted loans may be treated as current dues.
(v)  The borrower will be eligible for fresh need based finance.
(vi) The relief measures may be extended to all accounts of poultry industry,
which were classified as standard accounts as on March 31, 2006.
The Reserve Bank has also stated that the Government has proposed to
grant a one-time interest subvention of 4 per cent per annum on the outstanding
principal amount as on March 31, 2006 (not including any part of the principal
amount that has become overdue) to all poultry units availing loans from banks.
Instructions will be issued separately on the scope of the subvention and the manner
it shall be calculated and disbursed to the banks.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1279