PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 21, 2006
RBI allows banks to issue capital instruments in foreign
currency
With a view to providing banks in India with additional options for raising capital
funds, to meet both the increasing business requirements as well as the Basel II
requirements within the existing legal framework, the Reserve Bank of India had
allowed banks to augment their capital funds by issue of, among others, Innovative
Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI) eligible for inclusion as Tier 1 capital and Debt
Capital Instruments qualifying for Upper Tier II capital (Upper Tier II Instruments).
2.  In terms of the guidelines issued in this regard on January 25, 2006 banks are
allowed to issue these instruments in Indian Rupees and were required to obtain
prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India, on a case-by-case basis, for issue in
foreign currency. These guidelines have been reviewed and it has been decided to
make the following changes:
i) Banks may augment their capital funds through the issue of IPDI in
foreign currency up to 49% of the eligible amount (i.e., 15% of Tier 1
capital) without seeking the prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India
subject to compliance with certain specified conditions.
ii) Banks may augment their capital funds through the issue of Upper Tier II
Instruments in foreign currency up to 25% of their unimpaired Tier I
capital without seeking the prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India,
subject to compliance with certain specified conditions.
iii) Capital funds raised through the issue of these two instruments in foreign
currency will be in addition to the existing limit for foreign currency
borrowings by Authorised Dealers.iv) The total amount raised by a bank through IPDIs shall not be reckoned
as liability for calculation of net demand and time liabilities for the
purpose of reserve requirements and, as such, will not attract CRR/SLR.
v) Investment by FIIs in IPDI and Upper Tier II Instruments raised in Indian
Rupees shall be outside the limit (currently USD 1.5 billion) for
investment in corporate debt instruments. However, investment by FIIs in
Upper Tier II instruments will be subject to a separate ceiling of USD 500
million.
3. Detailed guidelines are available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in).
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007 /106