PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 6, 2006
Access to forex made easier for individuals:
More entities to handle Non-trade Current Account Transactions
The Reserve Bank of India has today issued a circular announcing measures
to enable individuals to have easier access to foreign exchange. According to the
circular, select Full Fledged Money Changers, Urban Cooperative Banks and
Regional Rural Banks will now be allowed to undertake a wider range of transactions
relating to release/remittance of foreign exchange for various non-trade related
current account transactions.
With the progressive liberalisation in foreign exchange related transactions,
common persons can now undertake a variety of non-trade current account
transactions without approaching the Reserve Bank of India. Individuals can, for
instance, access foreign exchange for tourism, medical treatment, education abroad
and in general a large variety of current account transactions that are not trade
transactions. Individuals can currently access foreign exchange for these purposes
only through authorised dealers.  With the Reserve Bank allowing full fledged money
changers, select urban cooperative banks and regional rural banks to disburse
foreign exchange for these purposes, individuals would be able to access foreign
exchange for such purposes from a wider range of entities.
Called category II authorised dealers, these institutions will be able to
disburse foreign exchange for purposes such as, private visits, business travel, fee
for participation in global conferences and specialised training, remittance for
participation in international events/competitions (towards training, sponsorship and
prize money), film shooting, medical treatment abroad, overseas education,
remittance under educational tie up arrangements with universities abroad,
remittance towards fees for examinations held in India and abroad and additional
score sheets for GRE, TOEFL, etc., employment and processing, assessment fees
for overseas job applications,  emigration and emigration consultancy fees,
skills/credential assessment fees for intending migrants, visa fees, registration
/subscription / membership fees to international organisations.
With the decision to widen and rationalise the intermediate tier of authorised
persons licensed to undertake foreign exchange transactions, the Reserve Bank
intends to make foreign exchange easily accessible to common persons and hopes
that competition would lead to better customer service.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank of India had, with a view to
liberalising and rationalising the scope of activities currently undertaken by the
authorised persons set up an internal group to study the related issues and make
recommendations keeping in view the need for enhanced as well as wider access
and accompanying safeguards, especially reporting requirements. The report of theInternal Group was placed on the RBI website for feedback. The circular issued
today to allow more entities to disburse foreign exchange for current account
transactions takes into account the feedback received on the recommendations of
this Internal Group,
The A.P.(Dir Series) Circular No. 25 dated March 6, 2006 on this subject is
available on the RBI website (http://www.rbi.org.in).
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1124