PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 23, 2006
RBI releases Summer and Monsoon 2006 edition of
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers
The Reserve Bank of India today released the Summer and Monsoon 2006
issue of its Occasional Papers. This issue of the Occasional papers is woven around
some important themes which are at the forefront of discussions worldwide. It
contains a rich fare of articles, special notes and book reviews.
The first paper entitled “A Review of Cross-Country Experience in Capital
Account Liberalisation” by Mohua Roy, Rekha Misra and Sangita Misra. The
paper reviews the experience of select countries - both advanced and emerging
markets - in regard to capital account liberalisation (CAL).  The paper analyses the
advanced countries' experience with regard to CAL with special focus on the
sequencing of CAL. It has also analysed the move towards CAL by many emerging
market economies (EMEs) during the 1980s and the circumstances that led to some
policy reversals and the subsequent change in the mainstream thinking during the
1990s. The paper presents some extant capital account restrictions in select
advanced countries and EMEs, emanating from security and prudential
considerations that have come to be accepted as being consistent with a framework
of full capital account liberalisation. Finally, the paper draws some lessons from the
cross-country experience, particularly in regard to the need for sound economic
policies and effective risk management strategies, prudential supervision and proper
reporting standards to meet the emerging challenges of CAL.
The second paper, “Identifying Asset Price Bubbles in the Housing
Market in India - Preliminary Evidence” by Himanshu Joshi is devoted to the
analysis of housing market in India. It employs a special decomposition scheme for
the structural VAR to study the impact of permanent shocks to housing prices
attributed to monetary variables and income growth and, in the process, attempts to
identify speculative price bubbles in the housing market. Based on the monthly data,
the empirical evidence obtained in the paper suggests that the housing market in
India at present remains fairly well equilibrated if seen in terms of the proximity of the
actual housing prices and the estimated long run equilibrium housing prices. This
implies that the risk of speculation in the market is not yet materially significant.
However, as a mark of caution, the paper notes that since the empirical results
indicate that housing prices are significantly much more sensitive to permanent
interest rate shocks than shocks to credit growth, the stance of the monetary policy,
particularly that reflected by the setting of the policy rate, appears to be the single
most important arbiter of the future growth of the housing market. The paper,
therefore, mentions the necessity to take this factor into due account while
developing policy approaches in relation to the housing sector. Besides, as income
growth explains quite little about variations in housing prices, the paper notes that
the possibility of some adverse selection in overall bank financing of the housing
sector cannot be completely ruled out.
The third paper, “The Performance of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) in
India: Has Past Anything to Suggest for Future?” by  Biswa Swarup Misra notes
that since their inception, the RRBs have taken deep roots and have become a sort
of inseparable part of the rural credit structure in India. The paper mentions that the2
financial viability of the RRBs has, however, been a matter of concern since
the 1980s, just five years after their existence. A number of committees have gone
into the issue of their financial viability and possible restructuring. This paper follows
a deductive approach. First, the extent of the problem of the loss making RRBs has
been studied to analyse if the problem is confined to some particular sponsor banks
or States. Subsequently, an attempt is made to enquire as to factors that influence
the performance of the RRBs and the role played by the sponsor banks. The
empirical analysis in the paper has been couched in terms of profit and loss making
RRBs for a reasonably long (10-year) period to draw robust policy inferences.
The fourth paper, “What Drives Forward Premia in Indian Forex Market?”
by Anil Kumar Sharma and Anujit Mitra explores the behaviour of the forward premia
for the US dollar (USD) vis-à-vis the Indian Rupee (INR) during the five-year period
of September 2000 to September 2005. It notes that the Indian forex market
experienced a peculiar phenomenon in the years 2003 and 2004 where the forward
premia on USD spot (cash) vis-à-vis INR became negative. This phenomenon was
somewhat uncommon to Indian forex market wherein Indian rupee was always at a
discount to USD in the past. The paper tests hypothesis of uncovered interest rate
parity in the context of Indian market. It also tries to find out the factors that drive the
forward premia in the Indian forex market during this period. The paper observes that
the forex premia of USD vis-à-vis INR is driven to a large extent by the interest rate
differential in the inter bank market of the two economies combined with foreign
institutional investors' (FII) flows, current account balance as well as the changes in
the exchange rate of USD vis-à-vis INR.
In the section on special notes, the paper entitled, “State Finances and
Effectiveness of Policy Measures: An Analysis of Indian States” by Rajmal
provides a phase-wise analytical review of the fiscal situation of the Indian major
States over the previous two-and-a-half decades and examines the policy measures
and their effectiveness to strengthen the State finances. The analysis reveals that
the States' fiscal position showed imbalances, albeit in a varied degree, since the
mid-1980s which deepened in the second half of the 1990s. The effectiveness of
policy measures, the paper notes, has remained inadequate and exigency-driven
rather than structured. As the States face large resource gap, they require effective
and time-bound policy measures to enhance revenues particularly non-taxes and
shift in expenditure pattern aimed to channelise adequate resources for economic
infrastructure and social sectors to facilitate acceleration in growth.  The next paper
in this section entitled, “Banking Sector Developments in India, 1980-2005: What
the Annual Accounts Speak?” by Ramasastri A.S. and Achamma Samuel notes
that the banking sector in India is passing currently through an exciting and
challenging phase. It points out that the reform measures have brought about
sweeping changes in this vital sector of the country's economy. This paper attempts
to study the trends in important banking indicators for the 25-year period from 1980
to 2005. Analysing the data from balance sheets of banks, the paper draws some
important conclusions for the banking sector as a whole as well as for different bank
groups.
The Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers is the research journal of the
Reserve Bank. It contains contributions of the Reserve Bank’s staff and reflects the
views of the authors.
     Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/564              