PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 16, 2006
RBI invites Feedback on "Conflicts of Interest in the Indian Financial
Services Sector" Report
The Reserve Bank of India has today placed for feedback the Report of the
Working Group on Conflicts of Interest in the Indian Financial Services Sector on its
website www.rbi.org.in The feedback on the recommendations of the Report may be
directly sent to the Chief General Manager. Department of Banking Operations and
Development, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Centre-1, Cuffe Parade, Colaba,
Mumbai-400 005 or by e-mail to pvijayabhaskar@rbi.org.in or by fax to 022-22150663
before February 28, 2006.
The Reserve Bank of India had constituted a Working Group on Conflicts of
Interest in the Indian Financial Services Sector (Chairman: Shri D. M. Satwalekar) to
identify the sources and nature of potential conflicts of interest in the financial sector in
India and possible measures/actions to be taken for mitigating them. The Report of the
Group examines the various conflicts of interest situations, both nationally and
internationally, and attempts at providing an integrated framework of forward-looking
measures to mitigate/prevent such situations.
The Group has suggested that in the case of Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs),
improvement in governance mechanism could be brought about by transferring the
actual governance functions from the concerned administrative ministries to the boards,
specialised agencies (trusts, SPVs, etc.) formed for the purposes, professionalising and
streamlining the appointment process of directors, besides suitably revamping the
compensation and remuneration structures. In the case of private sector, control
structures and disclosure practices should be so devised, as to be consistent with the
interests of all stake holders, keeping in view the fact that control is often exercised
through a complex pattern of cross holdings involving subsidiaries, investment
companies and others, with the added dimension of investments by institutions
incorporated abroad.
It has also suggested that a Conflict Management Policy (CMP) for managing
conflicts should be developed by each institution / profession, by which a
commensurate premium / discount is placed on the ethical / unethical behaviours of the
individuals or the institutions. The government has an important role in ensuring that the
politico-judicial reforms are calibrated to meet the enhanced needs of an increasingly
complex financial sector. Stating that defining financial crime and crafting technology
neutral laws are the imperatives in this context, the Group has pointed out that financial
services is too crucial an industry in a country’s economy to be left solely in the hands of
the institutions and the regulators, for its regulation. In the Group’s view an enlightened
public, who are aware of their rights and obligations are the best safeguard for ensuringnon-exploitation of conflicts of interest by the financial intermediaries. In the Indian
conditions, the government and the regulators have an important role in enlightening the
public of their rights and obligations. The society at large should send a strong
message, through all possible means available that pro-consumer behaviour would be
rewarded, while anti-consumer behaviour would be appropriately punished.
While pointing out that it is tempting to prescribe more detailed "Rules of the
Road,” to mitigate the myriad varieties of conflicts of interest, the Group has stated that
the principles / rules enunciated are by no means substitutes for the overriding
importance of the time-honoured basics of managerial competence, sound judgement,
common sense and presence of a highly disciplined system of corporate governance, of
which, mitigation of conflicts of interests is but an integral part. Regulatory environment
should be based on principles rather than rules and should actively promote
transparency, market discipline, public awareness and education.
   Alpana Killawala
Press Release: 2005-2006/891                     Chief General Manager