PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 13, 2006
th
17 Conference of State Finance Secretaries
th
The 17 Conference of the State Finance Secretaries was held in the
Reserve Bank of India at Mumbai today. Finance Secretaries of 21 States
participated. Senior officials from Ministry of Finance, Government of India and
representatives from Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Controller
General of Accounts and the Chief Controller of Accounts attended the Conference.
Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, inaugurated the Conference.
The Reserve Bank has been, since 1997, organising the State Finance
Secretaries' Conference twice a year. The Conference all through has provided a
very useful forum for interactions among State Finance Secretaries, senior officials
of Government of India, Planning Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General, and
the Reserve Bank of India. The State Finance Secretaries play a key role in the
development process of their respective States and strive to achieve transparency,
stability, fairness and efficiency in the conduct of fiscal policies. The deliberations in
the past Conferences have served to arrive at a consensus on various issues in
furtherance of better financial management and fiscal prudence in the States.
Today's Conference aimed to take this consultative process further. Apart
from an assessment of the market borrowing programme of the State Governments
and operational issues pertaining to Government transactions, the discussions
primarily focused on the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Ways and
Means Advances to the State Governments, issues relating to liquidity of State
Government securities, compilation of data on State Government liabilities and
computerization of treasuries.
G. Raghuraj
Deputy General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/886