PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
                                                                May 4, 2006
Basic Statistical Returns of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India
Volume-34, March 2005
The Basic Statistical Returns of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India -
Volume-34, March 2005 is available for sale. The Department of Statistical Analysis and
Computer Services of Reserve Bank of India brings out this publication annually. The
Volume, thirty-fourth in the series, presents comprehensive data on Number of Offices,
Employees, Deposits and Credit based on Basic Statistical Returns in respect of the
offices of the scheduled commercial banks in India as at end-March 2005. The Volume
is divided into five different Sections providing credit and deposit data of scheduled
commercial banks with reference to various classificatory characteristics. Section 1
presents general information on commercial banking as also the summary data on
deposits and credit at all-India and State level. Section 2 gives State/District-wise
distribution of deposits and outstanding credit classified according to population groups
and bank groups. Data on deposits by type of deposits are presented in Section 3.
Classification of outstanding credit according to different categories such as size of
credit limit, rate of interest, type of organisation, type of account, bank group, State and
population group, etc. are given in Section 4. In Section 5, these are further classified
according to occupation of borrower. District and occupation-wise distribution of
outstanding credit is also given in the final section.
The publication is also available separately on CD-ROM. Index/search allows
easy navigation. The tables are in MS Excel formats, which are easy to download/copy.
The publication is priced as below:
Inland    :  i) Rs. 180/-  (Normal)
            ii) Rs 220/- (Inclusive of Postage)
Abroad  : i) US $ 55 (Inclusive of Courier Charges)
            ii) US $ 20 (Inclusive of Registered Airmail Charges)
The copies of publication/CD are available in the Sales Section (DRRP), Amar
Building (Ground floor), P. M. Road, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001. Order for purchase can be placed with the
Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, Amar Building (Sixth Floor), P. M. Road,
Fort, Mumbai-400 001 on payment through D.D/Cheque/Pay Order drawn in favour of
Reserve Bank of India, payable at Mumbai only. The publication is also available at the
Reserve Bank's Website on the Internet at URL: www.rbi.org.in
 P.V.Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1418