November 30, 2006
Financial Regulation of Systemically Important NBFCs
and Banks’ Relationship with them
As mentioned in Para 141 of the Mid Term review of the Annual Policy
Statement 2006 – 07, the Reserve Bank of India had constituted an Internal
Group to study the issues of regulatory convergence, regulatory arbitrage and to
recommend a policy framework for level playing field in the financial sector. The
report of the Group was placed on the Reserve Bank's web-site for wider
dissemination and comments. In the light of the recommendations of the Group
and the feedback received, and in view of the importance of this segment of the
financial sector, a draft circular was prepared and placed in the public domain to
invite further feedback by November 3, 2006. The draft guidelines were open for
comments till close of business on November 17, 2006. On the basis of the
feedback received, the draft guidelines have been suitably revised and are now
issued for further comments by December 7, 2006. The salient features of the
revised draft guidelines are:
a) All systemically important non deposit taking NBFCs shall :
i) maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10%;
ii) comply with single and group exposure norms, which are
similar to those applicable to deposit taking NBFCs;
b) Banks may assume exposure on a single NBFC (both deposit
taking and non-deposit taking) up to 10% of their capital funds,
and to all NBFCs up to 40% of their capital funds. These limits
may be exceeded by 5% and 10% of capital funds, respectively, if
the additional exposure is on account of funds on-lent by the
NBFCs to infrastructure sector.
c) NBFCs promoted by the parent / group of a foreign bank having
presence in India, which is a subsidiary of the foreign bank’s
parent / group or where the parent / group is having management
control would be treated as part of that foreign bank’s operations
in India and brought under the ambit of consolidated prudential
regulations.
d) NBFCs which are subsidiaries of banks or where banks have a
management control will also be allowed to offer discretionary
portfolio management scheme to their clients, on a case by case
basis.
e) Banks in India, including foreign banks operating in India, shall
not hold more than 10 % of the paid up equity capital of a deposit
taking NBFC. This restriction would, however, not apply to
investment in housing finance companies.2
f) NBFCs set up under the automatic route will be permitted to
undertake only those 19 activities which are permitted under the
automatic route. Diversification into any other activity would
require the prior approval of FIPB. Similarly a company which has
entered into an area permitted under the FDI policy (such as
software) and seeks to diversify into NBFC sector subsequently
would also have to ensure compliance with the minimum
capitalisation norms and other regulations as applicable.
Taking into account the likelihood that some of the banks/NBFCs may not
be in compliance with some of the elements of the revised regulatory framework it
has been decided to provide for a transition period up to end March 2007.
Accordingly, banks and NBFCs should comply with all elements of the revised
framework with effect from April 1, 2007.  In case any NBFC – ND – SI or bank
needs more time for compliance, they shall apply to the concerned regulatory
department of the Reserve Bank of India before the close of business on January
31, 2007 clearly indicating the reasons for which they are not able to ensure
compliance within the above period and the time frame within which they would be
able to comply with all the relevant elements. This will enable the Reserve Bank to
take a view on the requests by end March 2007.
The guidelines contained in this circular will be applicable to the NBFCs as
specified in the relevant paragraphs except the categories mentioned below for
which the present regulatory framework will continue to apply for the present:
i) The Residuary Non Banking Companies (RNBCs) and Primary Dealers
(PDs).
ii) Government owned companies, as defined under Section 617 of the
Companies Act, which are registered with the Reserve Bank of India as
NBFCs.
Alpana Killawala
Chi8ef General Manager
Press Release:2006-2007/744