PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
                   April 4, 2006
Revised Scheme of Ways and Means Advances (WMA)
to State Governments- 2006-07
The Reserve Bank of India has revised the Scheme of Ways and Means Advances for
the State Governments. The revised scheme for 2006-07 is as under:
Normal WMA Limits
The base for calculating Normal WMA limit has been defined as total (revenue plus
capital) expenditure excluding repayments and adjusted for one-time ad hoc expenditures.
Lottery expenditures have also been excluded from the base. In the case of a State
Government, which has a revenue surplus, the base is defined as above, while in the case of
a State having a revenue deficit, the base excludes the revenue deficit.   The base would
incorporate only actuals data.
The Normal WMA limits for 2006-07 (beginning April 2006) have been computed by
taking the average of the recommended base for the years 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04
(all actuals data as presented to the State Legislatures). As part of one-time expenditures,
actual amounts mobilized via power bonds during 2003-04 are excluded from the base. A
multiplication factor of 3.1 per cent for the non-special category States and 4.1 per cent for
the special category States have been applied on the average of the recommended base.
The computed limits have been rounded off to the nearest multiple of Rs.5 crore. It has also
been ensured that there is no reduction in the Normal WMA limit for any State Government
from the existing (2005-06) level.
As per the revised formula, the total normal WMA limits for 2006-07 works out to
Rs.9,875 crore as against the present limit of Rs.8,935 crore, representing an increase of
Rs.940 crore or about 10.5 per cent.
The Normal WMA limits would be reviewed every year and the decision to modify the
limits would be taken by the Reserve Bank in the light of the emerging situation.
Interest Rates on Normal WMA
The rate of interest charged on Normal WMA will be (a) Repo Rate (currently 6.50 per
cent) for the period of 1 to 90 days and (b) one per cent above the Repo Rate for the period
beyond 90 days.
Special WMA Limits
There is no change in the existing Special WMA Scheme except with regard to (a) the
rate of interest on such advances and (b) the investment of the States in Consolidated
Sinking Fund (CSF)/ Guarantee Redemption Fund (GRF).  Accordingly, the Special WMA
Scheme will continue to be linked to the investments made by State Governments in the
Government of India securities, i.e., dated securities and Treasury Bills. A uniform margin of
five per cent will be applied on the market value of the securities for determining the
operating limit of Special WMA. The States will have to avail of Special WMA limits first
before seeking accommodation under the Normal WMA limits.  The rate of interest applicable
to Special WMA will be one per cent below the Repo Rate as against one per cent below the
Bank Rate at present.
Special WMA and Investment in CSF/GRF2
The net incremental (i.e. new investment less redemption/liquidation)
annual investment of States in Consolidated Sinking Fund (CSF) / Guarantee Redemption
Fund (GRF) will be eligible for availing Special WMA. In case the CSF / GRF Scheme of the
State Governments incorporate this provision then Special WMA against the net incremental
annual investment in CSF / GRF will be provided but upto a ceiling equivalent to their Normal
WMA limit.  The daily Special WMA entitlement of the State Government will be determined
on the basis of its net incremental investment in CSF/GRF on a year-on-year basis. It may be
noted that this incentive would not be applicable to the outstanding balance of a State
Government under CSF / GRF. A State Government will not be permitted to avail Special
WMA under this provision if there is a decline in its outstanding CSF / GRF balance, vis-à-vis
the level in the corresponding period of the previous year.
Minimum Balance
The present scheme of maintaining minimum balance with the RBI will continue.
There is no change in the amount of minimum balance to be maintained by the State
Governments.
Overdraft Regulation Scheme
There is no change in the existing Overdraft Regulation Scheme except in respect of
interest charged thereon. Accordingly, the Overdraft Regulation Scheme is: 
(i) A State can be in overdraft for 14 consecutive working days. In case the
overdraft continues in the State's account beyond 14 consecutive working days,
the RBI and its agencies shall stop payments in respect of the concerned State
Government.
(ii) The existing norm of restricting overdraft to 100 per cent of the Normal WMA
limit will continue. If the overdraft exceeds this limit for five consecutive working
days for the first time in a financial year, the Reserve Bank will advise the State
to bring down the overdraft level within the 100 per cent of WMA limit. If,
however, such irregularity occurs on a second or subsequent occasion in the
financial year, the Reserve Bank will stop payments notwithstanding provision
(i) above, which permits the State overdraft upto 14 days.
(iii) No State Government will be allowed to be in overdraft for more than 36
working days in a quarter. If this is not adhered to, payments will be stopped,
irrespective of clauses (i) and (ii) above.
(iv) The rate of interest on overdraft will be: (a) overdraft up to 100 per cent of
Normal WMA limit - two per cent above the Repo Rate, and (b) overdraft
exceeding 100 per cent of the Normal WMA limit - five per cent above the Repo
Rate.
All State Governments are advised to put in place a monitoring mechanism for their
availment of WMA, so that they are in a position to take remedial measures to avoid
emergence of overdraft, whenever they avail of WMA in excess of 75 per cent of their
Normal WMA limit.
Next Review of the WMA Scheme
The next review of the WMA/OD scheme will be undertaken after the receipt of the
recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1276