PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 15, 2006
RBI releases Report of the Working Group to formulate a Scheme
for ensuring Reasonableness of Bank Charges
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today placed on its website (www.rbi.org.in)
the report of the Working Group to formulate a Scheme for ensuring Reasonableness
of Bank Charges. Views/suggestions on the recommendations of the Working Group
may please be sent to the Reserve Bank by email at kazasudhakar@rbi.org.in or can
be faxed to 022-22630482.
The practice of Indian Banks' Association fixing the benchmark service
charges on behalf of the member banks was discontinued in 1999 and the decision
to prescribe service charges was left to the discretion of the boards of individual
banks. Banks were then advised that they should ensure that the charges were
reasonable and not out of line with the average cost of providing the services and
that the customers with low volume of activities were not penalised. However, the
Reserve Bank has continued to receive representations from the public regarding
unreasonable and non-transparent service charges. The plethora of complaints
received indicated that the issue of fairness in fixing the service charges by the banks
needed to be examined.
Accordingly, as announced in the Annual Policy Statement 2006-07, the
Reserve Bank constituted a Working Group to formulate a scheme for ensuring
reasonableness of bank charges, and to incorporate it in the Fair Practices Code, the
compliance of which would be monitored by the Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India (BCSBI). The Working Group, chaired by Shri N.Sadasivan, Banking
Ombudsman, Maharashtra and Goa had, among others, Shri H.N.Sinor Chief
Executive Officer, Indian Banks' Association and Shri S. Divakara, Joint Secretary,
All India Bank Depositors' Association and Member, Governing Council of BCSBI as
members.
 The Working Group examined various issues, such as, basic
banking/financial services to be rendered to individual customers, the methodology
adopted by banks for fixing the charges and the reasonableness of such charges. It
also examined the possibility of making suitable additions in this regard to the Fair
Practices Code and also the measures needed for monitoring compliance by the
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India.
           The Working Group has enumerated twenty-seven services related to deposit
accounts, loan accounts, remittance facilities and cheque collection as basic banking
services and has defined low value transactions for cheque collection and remittance
upto Rs. 10,000 in each case and upto $500 for forex transactions. The Working
Group has concluded that the reasonableness of service charges of banks cannot be2
tested on the basis of cost as, in general, banks were not using cost to fix their
charges. The cost as a pricing methodology is confined only to a small number of
banks that do not represent a significant share of the banking business. A few banks
that use 'cost' tend to offer 'bundled' products (accounts with add-on services) that
require a higher level of average minimum balance maintenance in the account and
this methodology implies an element of financial exclusion (though not by design).
The Working Group has, accordingly, recommended that the Reserve Bank may take
suitable steps to determine and evaluate the costs to banks for providing basic
services.
The Working Group has indicated broad principles of reasonableness for bank
charges. For basic charges rendered to individuals, banks will levy charges ad
valorem subject to a cap. It has recommended fixing of lower rates for individuals as
compared to non-individual entities, lower rates for special categories of individuals
such as senior citizens, rural customers, pensioners and the like.
The Working Group has also recommended banks should provide to individual
customers complete information on all charges applicable to basic services and any
proposed changes in charges in a timely manner. Banks may be required to inform
the customers in an appropriate manner recovery of service charges. Banks may
also be required to inform customers in all cases when a transaction initiated by the
bank itself results in or likely to lead to a shortfall in the minimum balance required to
be maintained.
As regards monitoring of compliance to the Code by banks, the Working
Group has recommended that BCSBI may collect from the member banks details of
complaints relating to the service charges. The Working Group also suggests that
BCSBI may track the changes in the levels of the service charges to identify any
abnormal increases. BCSBI may look to feedback from consumer organisations and
customer surveys to identify areas of significant non-compliance.
      Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/381 