PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
  
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279   
 
August 21, 2006 
RBI releases Report of  
Committee on Financial Sector Plan for NE Region 
 
It may be recalled that, the Reserve Bank of India had, on January 25, 2006, set up a 
committee to achieve greater financial inclusion and provision of financial services in the 
North-Eastern region (NER) and also to prepare an appropriate state-specific monitorable 
action plan for the region. Deputy Governor, Smt. Usha Thorat was the Chairman of the 
Committee. The Committee has since submitted its report, which is now placed in the 
Reserve Bank's website.  
 
The Committee held extensive discussions with different stakeholders in all the seven 
States of the region. It proceeded on the basic premise that banking culture would need to 
adapt to the local conditions. The focus should be on proactively connecting banks to the 
people, rather than waiting for walk-in customers. 
 
The Committee basically relied on an approach that addresses the supply side gap, 
since such a gap existed in the region. Also, research has demonstrated that more efficient 
financial intermediation itself can lead development. The Committee noted the limitations of 
the existing operating structures/processes and the inherent inadequacies of 
banking organisations, including Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and cooperatives and 
highlighted the imperative to marry banking process with technology, besides addressing 
human resources management issues. The Committee particularly emphasised the need for 
improving infrastructure, creating a favourable investment climate, focussing on a few sectors 
of strategic advantage for development and encouraging a favourable credit culture. The 
State Governments need to play an important role in this respect to ensure that financial 
sector development feeds into and is fed by economic growth and development. 
 
Major recommendations made by the Committee are: 
 
(i) In order to achieve greater financial inclusion and reach the national average, banks in 
the NER may draw up plans to provide at least 50 new households per branch each 
month for the next 4 years with a deposit account (with option to the household of 
opening such account as a “no frills” account). Taking into account the balances 
maintained in such accounts over a period, the bank may offer small overdrafts or 
General Credit Cards against such accounts and other products in terms of the extant 
Reserve Bank guidelines so that banking habit is actively promoted in the region. For 
this, a massive awareness campaign and sensitisation of the staff and clientele along 
with adequate groundwork may be done in the region.  
 
(ii) Keeping in view the local conditions, extensive recourse may be taken to bank/Self 
Help Group (SHG) linkage programme, business correspondent/business facilitator  2
model as also widespread use of Information Technology based solutions for 
increasing outreach. Local Community based organizations approved by District 
Consultation Committees may be used as business correspondents/ facilitators. 
Besides, post offices could also be used as business correspondents.  
 
(iii) Given the improving mobile connectivity in the region, IT based solutions including 
smart cards based and mobile payments may be adopted for carrying out banking 
transactions from non-branch locations with a view to increasing outreach. The 
Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology may prepare a pilot 
project for testing in a select area in the NER by December 2006 and based on 
experience, this project may be rolled out in other places. 
 
(iv) Recognising that community ownership and non-transferable rights on land lead to 
problems in offering land as collateral, simplified alternatives like Land possession 
certificate /certificate from the group/local tribal bodies/farmers clubs/Village 
Development Boards regarding the borrowers’ right to cultivate land may be accepted 
for sanctioning loans. For large loans to industries and services sector, parameters like 
established track record, projected cash flows, credit enhancement through partial risk 
sharing instrument, conditional guarantees by State Governments etc. may be 
considered.  
 
(v) Revision of the existing ad hoc incentive package for bank officers, including 
introduction of a performance based cash incentive component.  
 
(vi) Revamping of Regional Rural Banks, including strengthening of staff and market 
recruitment of CEOs have been recommended. 
 
(vii) Alternative legislation on lines of Mutually Aided Co-operative Societies (MACS) may 
be introduced so that grass root level associations have the option to form 
cooperatives under the MACS. The Vaidyanathan Committee may revisit the position 
for the NER to explore the possibility of state governments channeling the resources 
available under the revival package to alternative local community based organizations 
in those States where the primary cooperatives are not assessed as having the 
potential to deliver credit services. Alternatively, as suggested by various State 
Governments in the State specific reports, well established SHGs may be converted 
into cooperative societies.  
 
(viii) Each State Government may enter into Memorandum of Understanding with Reserve 
Bank as proposed in the vision document of RBI for urban cooperative banks and a 
single Task Force for Urban Cooperative Banks (TAFCUB) may be constituted in the 
region with few States being represented in each meeting by turn.  
 
(ix) Existing network of chests in the region may be strengthened and upgraded, where 
required. RRBs may be allowed to have currency chests with State Governments and 
RBI meeting part cost.  
 
(x) Electronic Clearing Service may be introduced within six months in all the clearing 
houses in all the State capitals to facilitate Govt. payments and receipts. A plan for 
implementing smart card/mobile based solutions on an open standard platform to be  3
accessed by all banks may be prepared by IDRBT and a pilot project in a suitable area 
may be tested within six months.  
 
(xi) The Reserve Bank may allocate specific responsibility to the different branches 
(including branches of RRBs) for providing need based forex facilities at centres 
deficient in such facilities and arranging for special training for the branch staff.   
 
(xii) Implementation of the location specific and activity-wise Action Plans for each of the 
seven states for stepping up flow of credit to Agriculture, allied activities and Small & 
Medium Enterprises (SME) sector.  
 
(xiii) Setting-up of a dedicated SME Debt Fund by SIDBI, in association with major banks, 
to provide co-finance up to 25 percent of project cost to first time entrepreneurs, where 
a bank is willing to provide the required funds. Identification of dedicated branches by 
major banks operating in the NER for encouraging entrepreneurs desirous of investing 
in agro-processing, agro-based industries and SME sector. Enhancement of insurance 
cover under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Scale Industries (CGTSI) scheme 
to cover up to 90 percent in the NER, as against the risk cover of 75 percent subject to 
a maximum of Rs. 25 lakh available in the rest of the country.    
 
 
                                                                                                               Alpana Killawala 
Press Release: 2006-2007/252                                                           Chief General Manager 
 
 
 
   