PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
December 13, 2006
Government of Maharashtra signs
MoU with Reserve Bank of India
The Government of Maharashtra and the Reserve Bank of India have today, on
December 13, 2006, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with regard to
urban co-operative banks in the state of Maharashtra. Consequent upon this, a State
Level Task Force for Co-operative Urban Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for
Maharashtra. Shri A.Narayana Rao, Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for the
States of Maharashtra and Goa is the Chairman of the TAFCUB and Shri Anil Diggikar,
Commissioner for Co-operation and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Government of
Maharashtra is its co-chairman. The other members of the TAFCUB are :
Shri N.S.Vishwanathan, Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Reserve Bank of India,
Urban Banks Department, Central Office, one nominee of the Government of
Maharashtra, Shri D. Krishna, Chief Executive, National Federation of Urban Co-
operative Banks and Credit Societies Ltd., (NAFCUB) and a representative of The
Maharashtra Urban Cooperative Banks' Federation Ltd. The first meeting of the
TAFCUB will be held soon.
Similar MoUs have also been signed with the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, Chhattisgarh and Goa.
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing the
training and computerisation needs of the urban co-operative banks in the State of
Maharastra with the objective of upgrading their human resource skills and
technological infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and quality
of management information systems.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-term Review of Annual Policy announced in
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a vision document for urban co-
operative banks would be prepared. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in public
domain a draft vision document in March 2005. As the urban co-operative banks are
subject to dual control by the Reserve Bank and State Governments, the vision
document envisaged the signing of Memorandum of Understanding between the State
Governments and the Reserve Bank of India to put in place an arrangement through
which there is a convergence on the approach and remedial actions required to be
taken for facilitating the development of the sector. The vision document also proposed
the constitution of a State Level Task Force for Urban Co-operative Banks, under the
chairmanship of Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for the concerned State with
Registrar of Co-operative Societies as the co-chairman and representatives from the
State and the National Federation of Urban Co-operative Banks (NAFCUB) among
others, as its members, for the purpose of identifying the potentially viable urban co-
operative banks and drawing up a time bound action plan for their revival by setting
specific monitorable milestones.
P.V.Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/806      