PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 20, 2006
Banking initiatives in Andaman & Nicobar Islands
Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor of Reserve Bank of India and three Deputy Governors
Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Smt. Shyamala Gopinath and Smt. Usha Thorat along with the
Executive Director Shri V.S. Das held a meeting on February 17, 2006 with the senior
officials of the Union Territory led by the Chief Secretary Shri D.S. Negi. The President
Andaman & Nicobar Chamber of Commerce, Adhyaksha Zilla Parishad, National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development and representatives of all the banks in the Union
Territory were also present during the deliberations. The meeting was held at Port Blair.
The meeting reviewed the post-Tsunami initiatives by the Administration and the banking
system, as also other matters relating to financial sector.
An important outcome of the deliberations was to set up an Empowered Task Force
comprising Development Commissioner, Secretary (Finance), and representatives of
Reserve Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, A&N State
Co-operative Bank Ltd., SBI and concerned banks to accelerate the resolution of relief
measures to the Tsunami affected borrowers adopting a bank-specific approach.
It was also decided to open more currency chests by banks, especially at Car
Nicobar and Campbell Bay as soon as feasible, in order to improve remittance facilities in
the Nicobar district.
Taking into account the high level of literacy and bank network coverage in the
islands it was felt that the banking system should work towards 100  per cent financial
inclusion in the Islands.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank of India held the first ever meeting of its
Central Board of Directors at Port Blair on February 16, 2006.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1057