` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 14, 2006
RBI Announces Constitution of a Committee on Financial Sector Assessment
Building up resilient, well-regulated financial systems is essential for
macroeconomic and financial stability.  This is being increasingly recognised as an integral
part of financial sector reforms in India.  Following the initiation of the Financial Sector
Assessment Programme (FSAP) in 1999 by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis, and their experience in the
conduct of assessment in member countries, the two institutions have jointly brought out in
September 2005, a comprehensive Handbook on Financial Sector Assessment.  The
Handbook is designed for use in financial sector assessment, whether conducted by
country authorities themselves or by World Bank and IMF teams.  The Handbook,
available to the public, is intended to serve as an authoritative source on the objectives,
analytical framework, and methodologies of financial sector assessment as well as a
comprehensive reference book on the techniques of such assessments.
It may be recalled that India, besides being one of the earliest member countries
participating voluntarily in the FSAP assessment, has been a forerunner in comprehensive
self assessment of various international financial standards and codes. The Reserve Bank
has also released a Synthesis Report in May 2002 and a Progress Report in January
2005.  The experience has thus far been very encouraging and the financial sector reforms
have progressed well in recent years, enhancing the soundness of the financial system
and promoting financial stability.
Consistent with this approach, it would be appropriate and expedient for India to
undertake a self assessment of financial sector stability and development, using the new
Handbook as the base as also any other pertinent documents for financial sector
assessment.  Accordingly, the Government of India has decided in consultation with the
Reserve Bank of India to constitute a "Committee on Financial Sector Assessment" with
the following terms of reference:
(i) To identify the appropriate areas, techniques and methodologies in the Handbook
and also in any other pertinent documents for financial sector assessment relevant
in the current and evolving context of the Indian financial sector;
(ii) To apply relevant methodologies and techniques adapted to Indian system and
attempt a comprehensive and objective assessment of Indian financial sector,
including its development, efficiency, competitiveness and prudential aspects;
(iii) To analyse specific development and stability issues as relevant to India; and(iv) To make available its report(s) through Reserve Bank of India/Government of India
websites.
The Committee may co-opt members depending upon the subject area of
assessment under consideration and may also constitute Technical/Advisory groups to
study and report on specific areas of assessment.
The Committee will be chaired by Dr.Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve
Bank of India, with Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary (Economic Affairs) as Co-Chairman.
Dr.Ashok Lahiri, Chief Economic Adviser and Shri Madhusudan Prasad, Joint Secretary
(Fund Bank), Government of India will be its members.  The Secretariat will be provided by
the Reserve Bank of India.
The Committee will review its own status and report the progress to the
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India in six months from commencement of its work.
                                                                                                              Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/378