PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 11, 2006
RBI releases Report of Working Group on
Improvement of Banking Services in Uttaranchal
The Reserve Bank of India has today placed on its website (www.rbi.org.in), the
report of a Working Group on improvement of banking services in Uttaranchal.
The Reserve Bank had set up the Working Group under the chairmanship of
Shri V. S. Das, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India to examine the
problems/issues relating to banking services in the State and prepare an action plan to
be implemented for the purpose.
The Working Group reviewed the role of banks and financial institutions in
supporting the initiatives being taken by the Government of Uttaranchal for promoting
economic development of the State, the financial position of Regional Rural Banks and
cooperative banks (both rural and urban), the extent of outreach of banking services in
the State and status of services offered to the tourists (both domestic and foreign) in the
State. The Working Group has given wide ranging recommendations/ measures/
actions, which need to be taken by banks, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development , Small Industrial Development Bank of India, Reserve Bank of India and
State Government for enhancing the outreach of banking services in the State, thus
leading to overall economic development of the State.
It may be recalled that the Governor and  senior executives of the Reserve Bank
of India had met the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttaranchal, Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari
and other senior officials of the State Government on May 5, 2006. Issues/problems
faced by the Government/ banks/ entrepreneurs with respect to speedier credit delivery
process were discussed. Keeping in view the geographical and diverse topography of
the State, the spotlight was on improving the outreach of banking services and
availability of bank finance for the development activities. Appreciating the keenness of
the State Government for speedy economic development and in recognition of the
problems confronting the Government in this regard, the Governor, Reserve Bank of
India had announced the constitution of the Working Group.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/ 504  