` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 1, 2006
RBI to authorise More Banks for Import of Gold
To enlarge the list of banks authorised to directly import gold the Reserve
Bank of India today invited applications from eligible banks. The Reserve Bank also
said that it will apply the eligibility criteria liberally while considering these
applications. This, the Reserve Bank said, was being done in order to enhance
competition in this sector. Currently, 17 banks are authorised as nominated agencies
for import of gold.
The current eligibility criteria to apply for authorisation as nominated agency
for import of gold are:
(a) The applicant entity should be a scheduled commercial bank.
(b) It should have unimpaired total capital of Rs.300 crore or more for its business
in India. In case the capital of the bank for its business in India falls short of
this, its global capital can be taken into consideration for this purpose,
provided it has sufficient experience and expertise in the area of gold
internationally and is willing to submit a letter of undertaking from its head
office/parent to the effect that the head office/parent would stand ready to
provide support and assistance to its gold operation in India.
(c) Its ratio of total capital to risk-weighted assets for business in India should be
9 per cent or more as per the latest balance sheet.
(d) It should have fairly advanced risk-management system in place to be able to
identify various risk involved in supply of gold to the eligible categories and
evolve control measures.
(e) It should have excellent track record both in terms of business reputation and
history of compliance vis-à-vis legal and regulatory norms/requirements.
(f) It should have previous experience or familiarity in respect of gold-related
business activities. In case it does not satisfy this requirement, it should
provide sufficient evidence about its intention and ability to forge links with
international banks, etc., having long-standing presence in the markets for
physical and financial gold so as to be able to develop in-house capabilities in
this area.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1101