PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 30, 2006
RBI releases Annual Report for 2005-06
Assessment of 2005-06
Overall Performance
The Indian economy recorded strong growth for the third successive
year during 2005-06 in an environment of macroeconomic and financial
stability, notwithstanding sustained pressures from record high international
crude oil prices. Real GDP growth accelerated from 7.5 per cent during 2004-05 to
8.4 per cent during 2005-06 on the back of buoyant manufacturing and
services activity supported by a recovery in the agricultural sector. Real GDP
growth has, thus, averaged over eight per cent during the last three years and
over seven per cent in the first four years (2002-03 to 2005-06) of the Tenth
Five Year Plan.
Growth in real GDP originating from the agricultural sector recovered to
3.9 per cent in 2005-06 from 0.7 per cent in 2004-05. The total production of
foodgrains at 208.3 million tonnes (mt) in 2005-06, albeit higher than that in
2004-05 (198.4 mt), was lower than that in 2003-04 (213.2 mt). A noteworthy
aspect of economic activity during 2005-06 was the continued recovery of
manufacturing activity, led by both investment and consumption demand. The
services sector maintained double-digit growth for the second successive
year, and remained the key driver of growth during 2005-06 by contributing
almost three-fourths to the overall real GDP growth. The strengthening of
economic activity in the recent years has been supported by a consistent
increase in the gross domestic investment rate from 23.0 per cent of GDP in
2001-02 to 30.1 per cent in 2004-05.
Monetary Developments
Demand for bank credit remained strong during 2005-06. Non-food
credit extended by scheduled commercial banks increased by 31.8 per cent
during 2005-06 on top of growth of 27.5 per cent a year ago. In order to fund
high credit demand, apart from mobilising higher deposits, banks restricted
their incremental investments in Government securities taking advantage of
their excess SLR holdings. Internal reserves as well as recourse to raising of
capital through equity issuances also enabled banks to fund credit demand.
Monetary and liquidity conditions remained largely comfortable during 2005-06
reflecting proactive liquidity management operations by the Reserve Bank
under the liquidity adjustment facility, flexible management of issuances
under the market stabilisation scheme, and some private placement of
Government securities. Reflecting the large order of growth in bank credit,
broad money (M3) growth (17.0 per cent) during 2005-06 was higher than in
the previous year (12.1 per cent) as well as the expansion of 14.5 per cent
projected in April 2005 in the Annual Policy Statement for 2005-06.
1Inflation was contained to 4.1 per cent by end-March 2006 within the
indicative trajectory of 5.0-5.5 per cent during 2005-06. The actual inflation
was considerably lower than the indicative trajectory and this could be mainly
attributed to the deferred pass-through of even the cognisable permanent
component of international crude oil prices. Prices of primary articles also
posed upward pressures, led by higher prices of wheat, pulses, eggs, fish and
meat. In order to stabilise inflationary expectations, the Reserve Bank raised
the reverse repo rate by 75 basis points during 2005-06 – 25 basis points
each in April 2005, October 2005 and January 2006. These pre-emptive
monetary policy measures by the Reserve Bank coupled with productivity
gains, and increased competition helped to contain inflationary expectations.
However, underlying inflationary pressures continue to remain in view of the
incomplete pass-through of permanent component of higher international
crude oil prices to domestic prices.
Balance of Payments
The balance of payments position remained comfortable during 2005-06
despite pressures imposed by higher international crude oil prices and outgo
on account of redemption of IMDs. The current account deficit, nonetheless,
remained modest during 2005-06 (1.3 per cent of GDP) as the surplus under
invisibles continued to remain buoyant, benefiting from the sustained growth
in exports of services such as software and other business services, and
remittances. Capital flows remained significant during 2005-06, exceeding the
current account deficit. Foreign investment flows, both direct and portfolio,
increased reflecting mainly the foreign appetite for domestic financial assets
on the back of strong fundamentals and robust corporate performance. The
balance of payments recorded a surplus and the foreign exchange reserves
increased by US $ 10.1 billion during the year. External debt, as a proportion
of GDP, continued its declining trajectory.
Financial Stability
Domestic financial markets remained largely orderly during 2005-06
even as interest rates edged up in various market segments during the year.
The Reserve Bank continued with its initiatives to strengthen the
financial sector with a view to maintaining financial stability. In order to
maintain asset quality, prudential measures were tightened for specific
sectors such as real estate where credit expansion was observed to be
extremely high. Guidelines were issued to permit banks to raise capital
through new instruments to provide them greater flexibility to meet the
enlarged capital requirements under Basel II. Concomitantly, the Reserve
Bank laid increasing emphasis on financial inclusion and improvement in
customer services.
Outlook for 2006-07
Developments during 2006-07 so far suggest that the growth momentum
of recent years is likely to continue during the year. High growth in the last
three years has been led by strong performance of the services activity and
manufacturing sector with some support from agricultural activity. This
suggests that the growth momentum mainly reflected structural factors,
although supported by cyclical and seasonal components.
2Assuming trend growth in agriculture under normal monsoon conditions
and barring domestic or external shocks, the Reserve Bank in its Annual
Policy Statement for 2006-07 (April 2006) placed real GDP growth, for policy
purposes, in the range of 7.5-8.0 per cent during 2006-07. The Reserve Bank
reaffirmed its forecast for GDP growth in July 2006 in its First Quarter Review
of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy. Growth prospects are, however,
subject to a number of downside risks. The risks emanating from the global
economy are: potential escalation and volatility in international crude oil
prices, a disorderly unwinding of the macroeconomic imbalances of the major
economies, firming up of overall inflationary pressures and expectations, and
a hardening of international interest rates along with the withdrawal of
monetary accommodation. The risk factors from domestic conditions relate to
the progress of the monsoon, infrastructural bottlenecks, emerging
apprehensions regarding the fiscal outlook and possible hardening of inflation
expectations.
Monetary Management
Demand for bank credit has continued to remain high in consonance
with strong economic activity. Scheduled commercial banks’ non-food credit,
on a year-on-year basis, exhibited growth of 32.2 per cent as on August 4,
2006 on top of a high base of 31.2 per cent a year ago. Concomitantly, growth
in broad money (M3), year-on-year, accelerated to 19.1 per cent as on August
4, 2006 from 14.4 per cent a year ago. The sustained high growth in money
supply and credit indicates that aggregate demand conditions continue to
remain strong. Despite sustained growth of bank credit, monetary and liquidity
conditions have remained comfortable during 2006-07 so far.
During 2006-07 so far, headline inflation has continued to be driven by
supply shocks as pressures from higher primary food articles prices
augmented sustained pressures from record high international crude oil
prices. Headline inflation measured in terms of variation in wholesale prices
was 4.9 per cent as on August 12, 2006 as compared with 3.7 per cent a year
ago.
In view of the developments in the real economy, and also taking in to
account monetary and global factors having a bearing on domestic prices, the
Reserve Bank in its Annual Policy Statement for 2006-07 (April 2006)
indicated that containing inflationary expectations would continue to pose a
challenge to monetary management.
There was widespread and simultaneous monetary policy tightening in
several countries in early June 2006, against the backdrop of marked and
heightened volatility in the international financial markets. Though not entirely
unanticipated, the virtual global coverage, nature and timing of these
developments posed a serious threat to the domestic economy which, thus
far, had been spared of turbulence in the debt and foreign exchange markets.
These developments, viewed in the light of the prevailing monetary and credit
environment underscored compulsions of swift action, as indicated in the
Annual Policy Statement. Accordingly, on June 8, 2006, the LAF reverse repo
and repo rates were increased by 25 basis points each to 5.75 per cent and
6.75 per cent, respectively.
In its First Quarter Review of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy
(July 2006), the Reserve Bank observed that containing inflation in the range
of 5.0 - 5.5 per cent warrants appropriate priority in policy responses.
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank raised the reverse repo rate and the repo rate
3by 25 basis points each to 6.00 per cent and 7.00 per cent, respectively, on
July 25, 2006 while continuing to keep Bank Rate and cash reserve ratio
unchanged.
For the Indian economy, the evolving economic and business
environment exhibits a number of encouraging signs that suggest
reinforcement of the robust economic growth exhibited in recent years. The
containment of inflation, and particularly inflation expectations, has boosted
growth prospects in an environment of stability and confidence. Timely and
even pre-emptive monetary measures reinforcing the policy stance paid
dividends in terms of low and stable inflation which, in turn, provided
conducive conditions for the undisrupted expansion of economic activity while
maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability. In addition to persevering
with monetary policy aimed at containing inflation expectations and preserving
macroeconomic stability, in particular, financial stability, the maintenance of
the current growth momentum will depend, inter alia, on policy improvements
in agriculture, improved quantity and quality of physical infrastructure and
progress in fiscal consolidation.
Agriculture
For the Indian economy to maintain its growth momentum on a
sustained basis, the agriculture sector would have to play a more important
role than it has in recent years. Real GDP growth in the agricultural sector in
recent years has been low and volatile. The actual growth in the agricultural
sector during the first four years of the Tenth Five Year Plan has averaged
only two per cent per annum as against four per cent envisaged in the Plan
period (2002-07).  The slow growth in agriculture in recent years is
characterised by the stagnation in domestic production in the case of
commodities like wheat, sugar and pulses. The production of wheat after
touching a peak of 76 million tonnes (mt) in 1999-2000 has since then been
range-bound at around 70 mt.  Similarly, the production of pulses has not
been able to exceed the peak of 14.9 mt reached in 1998-99.
At constant (1999-2000) prices, investment in agriculture has been
stagnant in recent years.  Revival of rural cooperative credit institutions
through legal and institutional reforms will help in improving the flow of credit
to the agricultural sector and this could, in turn, encourage investment in the
sector.   While increase in investment is essential for improving the prospects
of the agricultural sector, the composition of investments, the quality of
facilities created and the efficacy with which these facilities are used are also
important.
Reflecting the decline in overall investment in the agricultural sector,
infrastructure bottlenecks, particularly in regard to irrigation facilities,
continue to impede speedy adoption of improved technology. Apart from
increasing outlays on irrigation, efficient use of water resources is also
important. In this context, appropriate pricing of power can be helpful in
avoiding the excessive use of ground water. Promotion of micro-irrigation
technology comprising drip and sprinkler irrigation on a large scale also
deserves priority attention. Given the several risks that farmers face such as
future price and monsoon conditions, there is a need to put in place proper
risk mitigation policies.
Globalisation, rising income, and urbanisation call for increasing
diversification and value addition in Indian agriculture. The shifts in
consumption pattern warrant a shift of land and other resources to crops with
4higher potential for value addition. Going forward, agricultural growth would
largely accrue from improvements in productivity of diversified farming
systems with regional specialisation and sustainable management of natural
resources, especially land and water. Effective linkages of production systems
with marketing, agro-processing and other value added activities would play
an increasingly important role in diversification of agriculture. More focus
needs to be placed on agricultural research in the coming years as the
success so far has been restricted to select crops. The public extension
system needs to become more demand driven, with stronger synergies
between public and private extension efforts.
The suspension of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations
over the issue of huge subsidies being paid by developed countries to their
farmers is a matter of concern. Subsidised exports by developed countries not
only pose a threat to food and livelihood security in developing countries, but
also expose farmers of developing countries like India to unfair trade
competition in their exports. These developments are of particular concern to
India in view of the continued dependence of a majority of population on
agriculture and a large number of rural poor.
Industry
The rebound in the industrial sector in conjunction with the services
sector has powered India’s GDP growth since 2003-04 and has led to build up
of optimism of targeting still higher growth for the economy. The resilience
shown by the industrial sector against the hardening of global oil prices is
reflective of inherent strengths and capabilities that the industrial sector has
built up over the years since the initiation of economic reforms in the country.
Improvements in infrastructure facilities will be critical to sustain and
accelerate the current industrial growth. Infrastructural constraints in most
critical areas such as power supply and urban infrastructure continue to
impinge on the competitiveness of manufacturing activity. Apart from higher
levels of investment, issues of governance and management including
policies relating to appropriate pricing and user charges would need to be
addressed to achieve satisfactory results. Given the rising international crude
oil prices and stagnant domestic crude oil production, an integrated approach
to efficient use of energy – both oil and non-oil energy resources – assumes
importance.
A substantial manufacturing base is essential to absorb the workforce
and ensure sustainable growth of the economy. Apart from improvements in
physical and social infrastructure, this would, inter alia, require imparting
requisite skills to the labour. Furthermore, the Indian industry needs to step
up research and development expenditure to improve its competitiveness in
the global economy to move up the value chain and to strengthen its position
in skill intensive industries.
Services
The services sector in the country has benefited from the availability of
vast skilled labour. In the coming years, India is expected to benefit further
from the demographic dividend emanating from a higher proportion of younger
population. For this demographic dividend to be reaped fully, improvements in
education, skills, health and governance would be needed so that the Indian
labour force is globally competitive. There is need to improve the availability
of educational facilities at all levels – primary, secondary and tertiary – to
5equip the labour with the necessary skills to maintain current competitive
advantage.
With the quality of manufactured goods improving all the time, the
demand for high skilled labour is expected to accelerate. Furthermore, the
growing knowledge-intensive services activities will require human resources
equipped with appropriate skills. Hence, enhancement of skills of human
resources at all levels, especially at higher levels of education, requires
greater priority. In particular, demand for tertiary education is expected to
increase significantly in the coming years. A renewed focus on developing
high quality institutions of learning at all levels will be essential for India to
benefit from its demographic advantage.
Fiscal Policy
With the resumption of progress in approaching FRBM targets in 2006-
07, reductions in key deficits have been budgeted to fulfil the minimum annual
stipulations. Consequently, larger deficit reductions in 2007-08 and 2008-09
will be required to meet the FRBM targets. Given that revenue expenditure
has remained broadly stable in the last decade and a half, and non-tax
receipts continue to be sluggish, the scope for deepening fiscal empowerment
lies in improving tax revenue. This would require concerted efforts in
substantially improving the tax/GDP ratio through further widening of the tax
base and severe curtailment in tax exemptions.
Adhering to the FRBM targets in respect of fiscal deficit and revenue
deficit is critical for macroeconomic, financial, external sector and budgetary
sustainability. Any slippage in achieving the FRBM targets could erode the
gains achieved in the initial year of the FRBM. It could also generate a chain
effect at the State levels to relax targets set out in their fiscal responsibility
legislations. Any deviation from the FRBM targets will have both national and
international repercussions in terms of credibility.
External Sector
Merchandise export growth of 24 per cent per annum, on average, in the
past four years points to the growing competitiveness of Indian
manufacturing. Improvements in infrastructure assume critical importance for
maintaining and improving our competitiveness as also encouraging
investment in export production and sustaining the pace of export growth in
the longer term.
For the full potential of earnings from exports of services to be realised,
issues relating to skill enhancement and quality of education assume greater
importance. Demand for education, especially higher education, is expected
to grow immensely in the coming years in view of the demand emanating from
knowledge intensive nature of the services sector as well as demands from
the manufacturing sector.
Apart from higher oil prices, global economic prospects continue to be
marked by the risk of a disorderly adjustment to the rising level of global
imbalances and their changing distribution across nation states and country
groups. International financial markets have witnessed large volatility since
May 2006 after having remained benign during 2005 and early part of 2006.
Financial markets are currently re-pricing risks in an environment of
uncertainty and, in particular, in emerging market economies. There is
uncertainty as to whether the process of re-pricing of risks, in general, is
complete; and whether corrections are incomplete in the economies which
6benefited from lower-priced risks in the past. These developments pose
downside risks to the growth prospects of the Indian economy.
Financial Sector
Consistent with the policy approach of conforming the financial sector in
India to the best international standards with emphasis on gradual
harmonisation with the international best practices, all commercial banks in
India are required to start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31,
2007. On current indications, implementation of Basel II will require more
capital for banks in India due to the fact that operational risk is not captured
under Basel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not prescribed until
recently. The cushion available in the system, which at present has a Capital
to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) of over 12 per cent, provides for some comfort
but the banks are exploring various avenues for meeting the capital
requirements under Basel II.
While continuing with its efforts to strengthen the domestic financial
sector, the Reserve Bank has been laying an increasing stress on financial
inclusion with particular attention to issues relating to farmers. The Reserve
Bank is also laying greater stress on customer services to improve basic
banking services provided to the common persons.
Monetary Policy
In the light of high credit growth, the need to ensure asset quality
assumes importance. The Reserve Bank has accordingly drawn attention of
the banking sector to maintain asset quality. Appropriate measures such as
higher risk weights in case of sectors that have witnessed very high growth
and increased provisioning requirements have been put in place in order to
ensure financial stability.
In the context of the recent firming up of headline inflation across the
globe, primarily on account of higher oil and other commodity prices, issues of
proper measurement of inflation and inflationary pressures have attracted
renewed debate. In particular, the debate involves the relevance of core
inflation as a guide for the conduct of monetary policy vis-à-vis the use of
headline inflation. A core measure is useful if a shock is temporary. In the
current scenario, a large part of increase in the oil price is widely believed to
have a large permanent component. Therefore, the use of core inflation
excluding oil prices could be somewhat misleading. In India, core inflation is
not considered relevant for several reasons, especially because the two major
sources of supply shock, food and fuel, account for a large share of the index.
Moreover, pass through of higher oil prices has been halting and not full and
the headline inflation in a way understates the problem. Thus, the Reserve
Bank in its recent monetary policy communications has emphasised the fact
that there is clear evidence of a permanent component in the oil price
increase, and hence the headline inflation may be understated till that
component is fully passed through. While the permanent component is
judgmental, broad magnitudes could be perceived and articulated. Such an
explanatory approach to headline and underlying inflation pressure in
monetary policy has added credibility to the policy and influenced and guided
the inflation expectations in India.
The Indian economy is exhibiting strong fundamentals and displaying
considerable resilience. At the same time, there are continuing signs of
demand pressures, especially high credit growth, that could exert upward
pressure on prices when associated with supply shocks such as from oil.
7These pressures have the potential for impacting stability and inflation
expectations. Against this background, judgments are necessary on a
continuing basis as to the relative weights to be accorded to growth and price
stability, recognising lags in monetary policy. While domestic developments
continue to dominate the economy, global factors tend to gain more attention
now than before. The global outlook for growth is positive but downside risks
in regard to inflation and re-pricing of risks in financial markets need to be
recognised. Hence, it is necessary to strike a balance between reinforcing the
resilience of the Indian economy against global risks and giving a boost to
growth prospects over the medium-term, taking advantage of global
expansion.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/300
8