PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 13, 2006
Relief Measures for Natural Calamities
RBI Report on Comprehensive Package by Banks for Feedback
The Reserve Bank of India from time to time, issues guidelines/instructions to banks on
providing relief to bank customers in areas affected by natural calamities. The present
guidelines on relief measures are, however, largely confined to agricultural and priority sector
loans.  During calamities such as tsunami, heavy rains, floods and earthquakes in some parts of
the country, a number of instances relating to functioning of ATMs, opening of accounts of small
customers, operations of accounts in the absence of documents and failure of computer
networks came to the notice of the Reserve Bank. The Mid-Term Review of the Monetary Policy
Statement for 2005-2006 had announced that an Internal Working Group would look into the
whole gamut of issues involved and to suggest suitable revisions and additions to the existing
guidelines to make them comprehensive.
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank constituted an Internal Working Group under the
Chairmanship of Shri G. Srinivasan, Chief General Manager, Rural Planning Credit Department.
The draft report submitted by the Group is now being placed on the website of the Reserve
Bank of India (www.rbi.org.in). Views/suggestions on the recommendations of the Group may
please be sent within one month to gsrinivasan@rbi.org.in or can be faxed to 022-22621011.
The Internal Group has recommended, among other things, allowing opening of new
accounts, customers of one bank to use ATM networks of other banks for cash withdrawals with
charges being borne by the parent bank, increasing ATM daily cash withdrawal limits and
dispensing cash through mobile ATMs. The internal group has also recommended deferring of
payments and waiving of late fees and penalties related to the non-payment of the dues in
respect of credit cardholders residing in the areas affected by natural calamity for a period of
one to two months and avoiding reporting of adverse credit information may also be considered
by credit card issuing banks.
The relief measures recommended by the Group include raising the consumption loan
limit from Rs. 250 to Rs. 10,000 without any collateral, with a provision for further enhancement
to Rs. 25,000 at the bank's discretion. The reliefs to be extended may include freezing the
account and lowering interest rates as well as avoiding reporting adverse credit information.
The Group also recommended that banks may be advised to formulate a full-fledged
comprehensive business continuity plan which should include opening of temporary branches
for a period of 30 days, opening of satellite offices, extension counters or mobile banking
facilities, alternative arrangements for supply of currency notes in the affected areas, opening of
repositories at post offices and treasuries, facilitating expeditious opening of bank accounts. For
availability of information on the relief measures, the internal group has also suggested setting
up of a control room/helpline at the SLBC Convenor banks, helpline in the Reserve Bank and
Nodal Offices in banks in affected areas.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1318