PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
October 17, 2006
Government of Goa signs
MoU with Reserve Bank of India
The Government of Goa and the Reserve Bank of India have today, on October
17, 2006, signed a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to urban co-operative
banks in the state of Goa. Consequent upon this, a State Level Task Force for Urban
Co-operative Banks (TAFCUB) has been constituted for Goa. Shri A.Narayana Rao,
Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for the States of Maharastra and Goa is the
Chairman of the TAFCUB and Shri R. Mihir Vardhan, Registrar, Co-operative Societies,
Government of Goa is its co-chairman. The other members of the TAFCUB are: a
representative from the Government of Goa, Smt. Raksha Devi, Deputy General
Manager, Central Office of Urban Banks Department, Reserve Bank of India, and two
representatives from the urban co-operative banking sector. The first meeting of the
TAFCUB will be held soon.
Similar MoUs have also been signed with the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal and Chhattisgarh.
As part of its developmental role, the Reserve Bank would also be assessing the
training and computerisation needs of the urban co-operative banks in the State of Goa
with the objective of upgrading their human resource skills and technological
infrastructure so that they improve their operational efficiency and quality of
management information systems.
It may be recalled that in the Mid-term Review of Annual Policy announced in
October 2004, the Reserve Bank had announced that a vision document for urban co-
operative banks would be prepared. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed in public
domain a draft vision document in March 2005. As the urban co-operative banks are
subject to dual control by the Reserve Bank and State Governments, the vision
document envisaged the signing of Memorandum of Understanding between the State
Governments and the Reserve Bank of India to put in place an arrangement through
which there is a convergence on the approach and remedial actions required to be
taken for facilitating the development of the sector. The vision document also proposed
the constitution of a State Level Task Force for Urban Co-operative Banks, under the
chairmanship of Regional Director of the Reserve Bank for the concerned State with
Registrar of Co-operative Societies as the co- chairman and representatives from the
State and the National Federation of Urban Co-operative Banks (NAFCUB) among
others, as its members, for the purpose of identifying the potentially viable urban co-
operative banks and drawing up a time bound action plan for their revival by setting
specific monitorable milestones.
Alpana Killawala
Press Release : 2006-2007/ 536     Chief General Manager