PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 27, 2006
Non-adherence to KYC Norms and Directives/ Guidelines
relating to Loans against Shares/ IPOs - Penal Action taken
The Reserve Bank of India, in exercise of powers vested in it under the
provisions of Section 47 A (1)(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, has imposed
monetary penalties on three more scheduled commercial banks for violation of its
regulations on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms, for breach of prudent banking
practices and for not adhering to its directives/ guidelines relating to loans against
shares/ IPO. 
The Reserve Bank had issued show cause notices to these banks. In
response to the show cause notices, banks had submitted their written responses
and the Chief Executive Officers had also sought personal hearing with the Reserve
Bank, which was granted.
On careful examination of banks' submissions, the Reserve Bank has come to
a conclusion that the aforesaid violations were substantiated and accordingly, the
following monetary penalties are imposed.
a) HDFC Bank Ltd.         –  Penalty of Rs. 25 lakh
b) ING Vysya Bank Ltd.  –  Penalty of Rs. 10 lakh
c) IDBI Ltd.       –  Penalty of Rs. 5  lakh
The quantum of the penalty has been decided on basis of the magnitude and
enormity of the contravention/ violation observed in each bank. The details of the
irregularities committed by each bank have been placed on the RBI website.
It may be recalled that on January 23, 2006 the Reserve Bank had penalised
seven scheduled commercial banks including HDFC Bank for violation of RBI
regulations on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms, for breach of prudent banking
practices and facilitating misuse of IPO finance to ineligible borrowers.
In October 2004, as part of measures to improve the transparency of banks,
the Reserve Bank had announced its decision to disclose in public domain
information on penalties imposed on banks after due process of advising a bank and
seeking its explanation so as to give reasonable opportunity to the bank for being
heard.
P.V.Sadanandan
    Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1089