PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
www.rbi.org.in 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279   
 www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
November 10, 2006 
RBI expands coverage of its “Database on Indian Economy” 
The Reserve Bank of India has today further expanded the coverage of its 
"Database on Indian Economy" to include, among other things, static reports on volume 
of corporate debt traded at National Stock Exchange (NSE), cash balances of 
scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) and various other data series related to banks 
and financial institutions.  
The additional reports released on the Database on Indian Economy today are: 
a. Cumulative Cash Balance of SCBs 
b. Aggregate Deposits of Non-Banking Companies 
c. Investment of Scheduled Commercial Banks 
d. Bank Group-wise Investments by types of Securities 
e. Bank Group-wise Classification of Investments in Other Trustee Securities 
f. Bank Group-wise Investments in Shares & Debentures of Joint Stock 
Companies 
g. Scheduled Commercial Bank’s Investments in Bonds issued by Public Sector 
Enterprises 
h. State-wise Classification of SCBs Investment in State Government Securities 
and Other State Level Securities 
i. Bank Group-wise and State-wise Classification of SCBs Investment in State 
Government Securities and Other State Level Securities 
j. Traded Volume in Corporate debt traded at NSE 
k. Liabilities & Assets of IDBI 
l. Liabilities & Assets of IFCI 
m. Liabilities & Assets of IIBI 
n. Liabilities & Assets of EXIM BANK 
o. Small Savings-Yearly 
p. Small Savings-Monthly 
With the release of these data series, the Database on Indian Economy would 
now have 167 static reports (subject and frequency wise), 69 subject wise and 53 
frequency wise data query templates covering various sectors of the Indian economy.  
 The Reserve Bank of India's Database on Indian Economy is available on its 
website (www.rbi.org.in) under the Database Section. This can also be directly 
accessed through URL https://cdbmsi.reservebank.org.in/.  The home page of the 
Database on Indian Economy lists the data series available on it. The coverage of the 
Database is continuously being expanded on the basis of the feedback received from 
the users of the database.  
 Users are requested to provide their feedback through a feedback link on the site 
so as to enable further improvements in the coverage of data series in the system. 
 
 
       Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2006-2007/ 647          Chief General Manager 