PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 1, 2006
RBI releases Report of the Committee on Fuller CAC;
Sets up a Task Force to untie Knots in Forex Management Systems
The Reserve Bank of India today releases the Report of the Committee on Fuller
Capital Account Convertibility on its website (www.rbi.org.in) The report was submitted
to the Reserve Bank of India on July 31, 2006.  The Committee, chaired by Shri S.S.
Tarapore, was set up by the Reserve Bank of India in consultation with the Government
of India to revisit the subject of fuller capital account convertibility in the context of the
progress in economic reforms, the stability of the external and financial sectors,
accelerated growth and global integration.  Dr. Surjit S. Bhalla, Shri M.G. Bhide, Dr.
R.H. Patil, Shri A.V. Rajwade and Dr. Ajit Ranade were the members of the Committee.
The Reserve Bank of India has also constituted an internal task force to re-
examine the extant regulations and make recommendations to remove the operational
impediments in the path of liberalisation already in place.  The Task Force will make its
recommendations on an ongoing basis and the processes are expected to be
completed by December 4, 2006. The Task Force has been set up following a
recommendation of the Committee.
The report of the Committee, apart from undertaking an assessment of the
measures taken towards capital account liberalisation since 1997, also provides an
overview of the Committee’s approach to the subject. It sets out the conditions that
would be concomitant to a move towards fuller capital account convertibility.
Accordingly, it addresses issues related to interaction of monetary policy and exchange
rate management, development of financial markets, regulation/supervision of banks
and the timing and sequencing of measures.
The report will be processed and measures may be taken from time to time by
the various authorities concerned, keeping in view the framework under the roadmap
suggested and the evolving circumstances, both domestically and internationally.
The Committee had, while considering fuller capital account convertibility,
incidentally observed that though the overall regime had undergone a significant degree
of liberalisation, in practice, some regulations relating to an earlier period of tight
controls continued to remain, giving rise to a disconnect between the regulatory intent
and the procedure in use.  There was a need to untie the knots in the foreign exchange
management systems to make liberalisation meaningful. It, inter alia, recommended that
a Reserve Bank of India task force should be set up immediately to identify the
anomalies in the present regulatory framework for current and capital accounts.
   Alpana Killawala
 Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/320