PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 25, 2006
Enhancement of Banks’ Capital Raising Options for Capital
Adequacy Purposes
The Reserve Bank of India has, today released the guidelines to banks for
raising capital funds through the issue of Innovative perpetual debt instruments
(innovative instruments), debt capital instruments, perpetual non-cumulative
preference shares and redeemable cumulative preference shares. The guidelines
have been placed on the website (www.rbi.org.in). The detailed guidelines in regard
to perpetual non-cumulative preference shares and redeemable cumulative
preference shares will be issued separately as appropriate in due course.
It may be recalled that banks are now required to maintain capital for market risks in
addition to credit risks. With the transition to the new capital adequacy framework
(Basel II) scheduled for March 2007, banks would need to further shore up their
capital funds to meet the requirements under the revised framework, which is not
only more sensitive to the level of risk but also apply to operational risks. Thus banks
would need to raise additional capital on account of market risk, Basel II
requirements, as well as to support the expansion of their balance sheets.
The feasibility of allowing banks to raise capital funds through the various
instruments as allowed under Basel Capital Accord 1988 has been examined.
However, since Tier 3 capital is short term in nature and is an optional item of capital
for meeting a portion of banks' exposures to market risks, this option has also not
been considered for the present.
Taking this into consideration and with a view to providing banks in India
additional options for raising capital funds, to meet both the increasing business
requirements as well as the Basel II requirements within the existing legal
framework, it has been decided that banks may augment their capital funds by issue
of the following additional instruments:
(a) Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (innovative instruments) eligible
for inclusion as Tier 1 capital;
(b) Debt capital instruments eligible for inclusion as Upper Tier 2 capital
(Upper Tier 2 instruments);
(c) Perpetual non-cumulative Preference shares eligible for inclusion as Tier
1 capital - subject to laws in force from time to time; and
(d) Redeemable cumulative Preference shares eligible for inclusion as Tier
2 capital - subject to laws in force from time to time.
While equity is the purest form of capital, the Basel prescriptions recognise other
instruments as eligible for inclusion as capital for capital adequacy purposes. The
instruments that are generally recognised as capital have various features of equity
built into them which take them closer to equity in substance and gives the regulatorthe comfort that these will be available to absorb losses, when required. At the same
time, the features of debt present in these instruments – like maturity, call option,
coupon, etc., helps the issuer to raise capital funds through these instruments at a
cost lower than the cost of equity. The advantage with these instruments is that
these are non-dilutive and are cost effective.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/946