PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 19, 2006
Reconstitution of the Technical Advisory Committee on
Money, Foreign Exchange and Government Securities Markets
The Reserve Bank of India has reconstituted the Technical Advisory Committee on
Money, Foreign Exchange and Government Securities markets to continue obtaining benefit
of expert opinion from financial market experts from areas, such as, banking, academics,
government, stock exchanges, credit rating agencies and market representatives.
The composition of the reconstituted Committee is:
Members
1. Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India (Chairman)
2. Shri C. B. Bhave, Managing Director, National Securities Depository Ltd.
(NSDL)
3. Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,  Ministry of Finance,
Government of India
4. Shri Arun Kaul, Treasurer, Punjab National Bank
5. Smt. Naina Lal Kidwai, CEO, Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation Limited, India
6. Shri Uday Kotak, MD & CEO, Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.
7. Shri A. P. Kurian, Chairman, Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI)
8. Shri M. M. Lateef, Chairman, Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI)
9. Dr. T. C. Nair, Whole Time Member, Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
10. Shri Ravi Narain, Managing Director, National Stock Exchange (NSE)
11. Shri P. K. Pain, Chief Executive Officer, Foreign Exchange Dealers
Association of India (FEDAI)
12. Dr. R. H. Patil, Chairman, Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL)
13. Shri R. Ravimohan, MD & CEO, Credit Rating Information Service of India
Ltd. (CRISIL)
14. Shri Sushobhan Sarker, Executive Director (Investment), Life Insurance
Corporation of India
15. Shri A K Sharma, DMD & CFO, State Bank of India
16. Shri V. Srinivasan, Chairman, Fixed Income Money Market and
Derivatives Association of India, (FIMMDA)
17. Prof. Susan Thomas, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research
18. Shri R. Vaidyanathan, Professor, Indian Institute of Management (IIM),
Bangalore
Deputy Governor(s), Executive Director in charge of Internal Debt Management
Department (IDMD) and Department of External Investments and Operations (DEIO) and2
Heads of Departments of Financial Markets Department (FMD), IDMD, DEIO, Monetary
Policy Department (MPD); Department of Economic Analysis and Policy (DEAP); Foreign
Exchange Department (FED) and Regional Director, Maharashtra and Goa of Reserve Bank
of India will be permanent invitees. The Secretariat of the TAC would be provided by FMD.
Heads of Department of FMD, IDMD, DEIO and MPD will be Secretaries to the Committee.
The terms of reference of the Committee are:
(i) to review and recommend measures for deepening and widening the money,
foreign exchange and government securities markets including those relating
to participants, products, institutional and infrastructural arrangements etc.;
(ii) to suggest measures for development of market and promoting liquidity in
money market instruments, foreign exchange market and government
securities;
(iii) to examine and advise on the evolving and desirable linkages among the
money, foreign exchange and government securities and capital markets;
(iv) to review the infrastructure, legal and institutional arrangements for trading,
transfer and settlement in the money, foreign exchange and government
securities markets in the context of the emerging payments system including
CCIL;
(v) to prepare and consider papers on topics relating to product/market
development and advise on the policies and practices for the same.
(vi) to review the qualitative and quantitative aspects of risk management,
accounting, disclosure, settlement, legal framework etc. in the money, foreign
exchange and government securities markets and render advise, and
(vii) to examine any other relevant issue having a bearing on these markets
referred to it, by RBI.
The Committee may appoint technical groups consisting of its own members and/or
outside experts to study and submit recommendations on specific issues, if necessary.  The
Committee will meet as often as it is required, but at least once in a quarter and will function
for two years from the date of its first meeting.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has in recent times taken several initiatives to
strengthen the consultative process for policy formulation covering areas, such as, monetary
policy, financial markets development and regulation.  The Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) on Money, Foreign Exchange and Government Securities Market constitutes an
important pillar of this process. Since the formation of the Committee, it has been
reconstituted from time to time, with the last reconstitution done on February 21, 2004 when
the Committee was renamed as the Technical Advisory Committee on Money, Foreign
Exchange and Government Securities Market (Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan) with a
broader ambit to cover foreign exchange markets. This Committee was in place for a period
of about two years in which it made valuable contributions to the reform process in the
financial markets in its sphere.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release No. 2005-06/1647