PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 9, 2006
Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad:
RBI announces Amalgamation Scheme with Federal Bank
The Reserve Bank of India has today placed in public domain a draft
scheme of amalgamation of the Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad Limited with the
Federal Bank Limited. The Reserve Bank has invited suggestions and
comments from members of public, including the banks' shareholders,
depositors and creditors on the draft scheme. The draft scheme has also been
sent to both the banks. Both the banks have been given two weeks' time, upto
January 21, 2006, to consider the draft scheme. The suggestions and
comments would be received by both the banks and the Reserve Bank up to
Saturday, January 21, 2006.  The Reserve Bank will take a view on the future
set up of Ganesh Bank soon thereafter.
It may be recalled that the Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad Ltd. was placed
under an order of moratorium on January 7, 2006. The order is effective upto
April 6, 2006 or an earlier date if alternate arrangements are in place. The
Reserve Bank was to decide the future set up of the Ganesh Bank of
Kurundwad Ltd. during the period of moratorium. The Ganesh Bank of
Kurundwad was taken under moratorium after being given time to arrange for
infusion of capital as also to explore other options for its future set up. Due to
the continued inability of Ganesh Bank to raise the required capital, the
Reserve Bank of India had to exercise the option of compulsory merger
available to it under Section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
The Reserve Bank received interest for taking over the Ganesh Bank of
Kurundwad Ltd. from the Federal Bank Ltd. The Federal Bank has, among
other things, proposed to pay the depositors fully. The Reserve Bank has
examined the proposal received from the Federal Bank keeping in view its
financial parameters, retail network and synergies as well as strategic
advantages. Taking into account the interest of depositors of the Ganesh
Bank of Kurundwad Ltd. as well as the bank's strengths and weaknesses, the
Reserve Bank has prepared a draft scheme of amalgamation of the Ganesh
Bank of Kurundwad Ltd. with the Federal Bank Ltd.
 Alpana Killawala
       Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/853