PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
January 25, 2006
RBI study on Role of Bank lending channel in
Transmission of Monetary Policy
The Reserve Bank of India has today published a study titled “Transmission of Monetary
Policy and the Bank Lending Channel: Analysis and Evidence for India” co-authored by Prof.
B.L.Pandit of Delhi School of Economics along with three internal team members under the aegis of
the Development Research Group (DRG). The study attempts to characterise the process of
monetary policy transmission in India and crystalise the role of bank lending channel, employing both
published and unpublished data broadly covering the period 1993-94 to 2002-03.  Development
Research Group (DRG) is constituted in the Reserve Bank's Department of Economic Analysis and
Policy undertakes quick and effective policy-oriented research backed by strong analytical and
empirical basis on subjects of current interests. The study was undertaken in the context that the
understanding of the process of transmission of monetary policy is a critical input for its designing and
implementation. In a country like India, the economic structure is undergoing crucial transformation
through changes in both intersectoral primacy and intersectoral linkages. The processes of economic
liberalisation and prudential regulation of the financial sector are underway. The financial sector is
changing in terms of its competitiveness, depth and spread. As a result, macroeconomic environment
and financial structure are both changing. Consequently, channels of monetary policy transmission
are evolving continuously.
The results of the study can broadly be summarised as follows: First, the analysis suggests
that there is not much difference between Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Bank Rate as alternate
policy instruments. However, on the basis of plausibility of relationships as given by the impulse
response functions, CRR seems to perform relatively better vis-à-vis the Bank Rate. Second, the
results support the existence of a bank lending channel in India. And finally, the lending behaviour of
big and small banks differs in response to a policy shock. In particular, small banks are more acutely
affected by contractionary monetary policy shocks as compared to big banks.
The results have important implications for policy. First, the existence of a bank lending
channel in the Indian context would imply that the central bank, while formulating the monetary policy,
is likely to encounter independent shifts in the loan supply. These changes in bank loan supply would
also induce changes in bank portfolios. Second, evidence seems to point to the fact that large banks
with a wider resource base can more successfully insulate their loan supply from contractionary policy
shocks vis-à-vis small banks. This would imply that bank mergers and other moves towards
consolidation in the banking sector, which are likely to lead to creation of bigger banks, have
implications for the efficacy of the monetary policy. Third, despite the gradual scaling down of CRR
and the Bank Rate, quantitative instruments like the CRR continue to be important along with the
price instruments like Bank Rate. This is primarily so in a medium-term framework, adopted in the
present study. Finally, prudential regulations have an important role to play in influencing lending
decisions of banks. In particular, the institution of capital adequacy ratios has made banks more
concerned with the risk-return profile of loans, since additional lending warrants augmenting of capital-
base in order to adhere to the regulatory capital standards.
This study is available on the Bank's website (www.rbi.org.in) under publications.
 Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/938