PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 16, 2006
Issue of Rs 20/- denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series with
additional/new security features without inset letter in numbering panel
bearing the signature of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs 20/- denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series without any inset letter in the numbering panel bearing the
signature of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor. The new series 2006 banknotes will be of the
same size and colour. While some of the security features of the existing Mahatma
Gandhi series have been retained, some have been modified and a few new security
features have been added.
The salient additional / new security features of banknote are as under:
Obverse (Front)
Security Thread: The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma Gandhi
portrait. The new banknote has a windowed demetalised clear text magnetic 1.4mm
wide security thread with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and RBI. The thread fluoresces in yellow on
both sides under U.V.light. The thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when
held up against light.
See-through Register: The small floral design printed both on the front (hollow) and
back (filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the Watermark
window has been replaced by the denominational numeral 20. Half of the numeral is
printed on the front and half on the back. Both the printed portions have an accurate
back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when seen against light.
Electrolyte Watermark: In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the
denominational numeral viz.20 appears alongside the Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the
watermark window.
Intaglio Printing: The portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, the Reserve Bank seal, Guarantee
and Promise clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem on the left, RBI Governor's signature and
identification mark for the visually impaired printed in intaglio i.e. in raised prints, (felt by
touch), have been made more prominent by increasing the depth.
Reverse (Back)
There is no major change on the reverse of the banknote except the following:
Year of printing: Year of printing appears on the reverse of the banknote.
All banknotes in the denomination of Rs.20/- issued by the Reserve Bank in the
past will continue to be legal tender.P.V.Sadanandan
Press Release : 2006-2007/228 Manager