PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
           e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 10, 2006
Measures for Banks to ensure Business Continuity
in Natural  Calamities affected Areas
The Reserve Bank of India issued instructions to all scheduled banks for
ensuring quick restoration of all banking services in areas affected by natural
calamities.  The Reserve Bank's instructions include providing continued access to the
customers to their bank accounts and facilitating opening of new accounts by persons
affected by natural calamities, especially for availing reliefs given by
Government/other agencies. The guidelines also cover measures to be taken by
banks to ensure continuity in other services like cheque clearing services and supply
of cash.
The guidelines were issued as a follow-up of the recommendations made by an
Internal Working Group set by the Reserve Bank to look into the whole gamut of
issues involved in restoration of banking services in areas affected by natural
calamities, in addition to the existing standing instructions providing relief to such
persons. The Reserve Bank set up the Internal Working Group in accordance with the
announcement it had made in its mid-term policy for 2005-06 in October 2005.
According to the Reserve Bank guidelines, in areas where the bank branches
are affected by natural calamity and are unable to function normally, banks may
operate from temporary premises, under advice to the Reserve Bank.  Banks may
also ensure rendering of banking services to the affected areas by setting up satellite
offices, extension counters or mobile banking facilities. Further, to satisfy customer’s
immediate cash requirements, banks could consider waiving the penalties for
accessing accounts, such as, fixed deposits. Restoration of the functioning of ATMs at
the earliest or making alternate arrangements for providing such facilities may be
given due importance. Banks may consider putting in place arrangements for allowing
their customers to access other ATM networks, mobile ATMs, etc. Banks have been
allowed to open cash repositories for temporary period reckoned as part of the
currency chest balances for meeting cash requirements in the areas where currency
chest services are dislocated.
While extending financial assistance, banks may, to their existing customers,
provide consumption loans up to Rs. 10,000 without collateral; extend timely fresh
financial assistance to resume productive activities not only to the existing borrowers,
but also to other eligible borrowers; and depending on the severity of the calamity and
its recurrence, extend the period of repayment of restructured term loans ranging from
7 to 10 years with one year of moratorium.In the context of the floods in three States - Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and
Maharashtra - the Reserve Bank has asked the convenors of the State Level Bankers'
Committee (SLBC) to hold special SLBC meetings immediately and take stock of the
measures required to provide relief to those affected.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2006-2007/207
2