PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 5, 2006
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005:
RBI releases Draft Rules and Regulations for Feedback
The Reserve Bank of India today released for feedback the draft Rules and
Regulations under the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005. It has
requested for comments/views to be sent to the Chief General Manager-in-charge,
Department of Banking Operations and Development, 5th Floor, World Trade Centre,
Mumbai 400 005 or at dmishra@rbi.org.in on or before April 15, 2006.
It may be recalled that the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
was passed in May 2005 and notified in the Gazette of India on June 23, 2005. The Act
was passed with a view to regulating credit information companies and to facilitating
efficient distribution of credit and for matters concerned or incidental to it. The Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 required Rules and Regulation to be
notified under the Act. While the Central Government was empowered to make the
Rules, the Reserve Bank was empowered to make the Regulations to carry out the
purposes of the Act. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has prepared the Regulations for
implementation of the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 and placed
them on the website for feedback.
Summary of Draft Rules and Regulations
Rules
(i) The Rules enumerate the procedure for appeal and other incidental matters
when an aggrieved credit information company whose application for
certificate of registration has been rejected or whose certificate of registration
has been cancelled, approaches the Appellate authority designated by the
Central Government. (Rules 3 to 19 of Chapter II)
(ii) Rules provide that the credit institution and the credit information company
should formulate appropriate policy and procedure, duly approved by its
board of directors, specifying the steps and security safeguards in regard to
(a) collecting, processing and collating of data relating to the borrower; (b)
steps for security and protection of data and the credit information maintained
at their end; and (c) appropriate and necessary steps for maintaining an
accurate, complete and updated data. Further, the credit institution or the
credit information company should ensure that the credit information is
accurate and complete with reference to the date on which such information
is furnished or disclosed to the credit information company or the specified
user as the case may be. (Rules 20 to 28 of Chapter III and IV)
(iii) The specified user should consider and decide such requisite steps for
ensuring and verifying the accuracy and completeness of data received from
a credit information company and protect the data from unauthorised access;
formulate and adopt an appropriate policy and procedure in this behalf duly
approved by its board of directors. (Rule 29 and 30 of Chapter IV and V)
(iv) The credit information company or credit institution or specified user shalladopt all reasonable procedures to ensure that their managers, officers,
employees are obliged to fidelity and secrecy in respect of credit information
under their control or to which they have access (Rule 31 of Chapter VI).
(v) The credit information company should maintain a high standard of customer
service by maintaining help desk, attending to complaints, feedback, queries,
etc., in speedy and efficient manner. (Rule 32 of Chapter VII).
Regulations
(i) The Regulations indicate which companies can obtain credit information as
specified users (insurance company, cellular/phone company, rating agency,
broker, trading member, SEBI, IRDA etc.) in addition to those provided under
section 2(l) of the Act. (Regulation 3 of Chapter II).
(ii)     The Regulations also deal with submission of application, grant of certificate
and the form in which application can be submitted and certificate can be
issued. (Regulations 4 and 5 of the chapter III).
(iii) The Regulations provide for the form of business in which credit information
companies can engage in addition to those provided under section 14(l) of the
Act. (Regulation 6 of Chapter IV).
(iv) The Regulations give the format in which a credit information company can
issue notice to the credit institutions or other credit information companies for
calling for the information.  (Regulation 7 of Chapter V, Form-C).
(v) The privacy principles which will guide the credit Information companies,
credit institutions and specified users have been indicated in the Regulation.
These encompass accuracy, security, secrecy, adequacy of data collected as
also limitation on the use of data, that is, the purpose for which the Credit
Information Reports can be made available and the procedure to be followed
by specified uses for getting reports. (Regulation 9 of Chapter VI)
(vi) Regulations provide that the maximum amount of fees leviable to specified
users should not exceed Rs.500 for individuals and Rs.5000 for non-
individual borrowers. Further, the fees charged to the credit institutions or
credit information companies for admission of a credit information company
should not exceed Rs.15,00,000. (Regulation 12 of Chapter VIII)
(vii) Regulations provide for the principles and procedures relating to personal
credit information in respect of manner and purpose of collection of personal
data, solicitation of personal data, accountability in transferring data to third
party, protection of personal data etc. (Regulations 14 to 18 of Chapter IX)
(viii) Regulations provide that an individual can file a complaint against a credit
information company, credit institution or a specified user for contravening
any provision of the Act. (Regulation 19 of Chapter IX)
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-2006/1284