PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
April 27, 2006
Issue of Rs 10/- denomination banknotes in Mahatma Gandhi Series with
additional/new security features without inset letter in numbering panel bearing the
signature of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor
The Reserve Bank of India will shortly issue Rs 10/- denomination banknotes in
Mahatma Gandhi Series without inset letter in numbering panel bearing the signature of Dr.
Y.V. Reddy, Governor. The new series banknotes shall be of the  same size and there is no
change in the images/design of the banknotes both at the back and front. While some of the
security features of the existing Mahatma Gandhi series have been retained, some have
been modified and a few new security features have been added.
The salient additional security features of banknotes are as under:
FRONT
Security Thread :
The security thread appears on the left of the Mahatma Gandhi portrait. The new
banknotes have a machine readable windowed demetalised clear text magnetic 1.4mm wide
security thread with inscriptions "ž¸¸£÷¸" and RBI. The thread fluoresces in yellow on both sides
under U.V.light. The thread is visible as a continuous line from behind when held up against
light.
See-through Register :
 The small floral design printed both on the front (hollow) and back (filled up) of the
banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the Watermark window has been replaced
by the denominational numeral 10. Half of the numeral is printed on the front and half on the
back. Both the printed portions have an accurate back to back registration so that the
numeral appears as one when seen against the light.
Electrolyte Watermark :
In addition to the Mahatma Gandhi watermark, the denominational numeral 10
appears alongside Mahatma Gandhi portrait in the watermark window.
BACK
There is no major change on the reverse of the banknote except the following:
Year of printing: Year of printing appears on the reverse of the banknote.Other Features:
Fluorescence
Number panels of the banknote are printed in fluorescent ink.  The banknote has dual
coloured optical fibres.  Both can be  seen when the banknote is viewed  under ultraviolet
light .
Paper:
Banknote is printed on a special watermarked paper with substrate cotton and cotton
rag. This gives the banknote a unique “feel” and “crackling sound”.  The new series of
Rs.10/- banknote has paper with increased grammage and caliper thickness.
All notes in the denomination of Rs.10/- issued by the Bank in the past will continue to
be legal tender.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1388