PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 23, 2006
RBI Survey on Impact of Trade Related Measures on
Transaction Cost of Exporters, 2004-05
The Reserve Bank of India had taken a number of initiatives to reduce the transaction costs
of exports in the recent period. These initiatives are announced in various policy statements as well
as through various liberalisation measures taken in the foreign exchange management arena. In
order to assess the effectiveness of these measures, Department of Statistical Analysis and
Computer Services (DESACS) has recently completed a survey on ‘Impact of Trade Related
Measures on Transaction Costs of Exports’. The broad features of the survey and major findings
are :
• The objective of the survey was to assess the effectiveness of the recent trade related
measures taken by Reserve Bank of India to reduce the transaction costs of Indian exports.
The survey also addressed the issues on procedural delays.
• The survey covered exporters of 15 major commodity groups, such as, textiles and clothing,
gems and jewelry, software, agriculture products, engineering goods. In order to ensure the
representation of exporters from all sectors and size classes, a two-stage stratified
sampling scheme was implemented. Accordingly, all export firms were first classified into a
few groups on the basis of commodity groups and size class (export volume) and then an
adequate number of firms were selected randomly from each group. Analysis has been
carried out based on the responses received from a sample of 120 export firms
representing all 15 major commodity groups.
• Majority of exporters believe that the measures initiated recently by the Bank have indeed
helped to reduce the procedural bottlenecks. Also more than 50 per cent of respondents
report that there were no procedural delays in most of the export processing activities.
• Improvement with respect to bank related activities involved in export processing has been
substantial. As many as 71 per cent of respondents report no procedural delay for ‘availing
post-shipment credit’ and 66 per cent for ‘availing pre-shipment credit’.
• Procedural delays, however, is reported to exist in the cases of certain activities like
‘realization of duty draw back’ and ‘issuance of bank realization certificate’.
• No visible discrimination towards any particular size class (in terms of volume of exports)
has been detected for almost all activities except for certain customs related activities, such
as, ‘clearing custom formalities’ and ‘realisation of duty drawback’, for which lower size
class of exporters responded to have faced severe delays due to procedural bottlenecks.
• An exporter may require to spend some incidental expenses at different stages of export
processing, like, swift charges, expenses for custom clearance, export inspection charges,
port related expenses, processing credit appraisals. Majority of the exporters report that
though each of these expenses is generally below Rs. 1000, they need to spend more than
Rs.2000 for ‘custom clearance’ and ‘port related expenses’.
• Majority of the respondents opined that the recent measures initiated by the Bank like
waiver of GR/SDF forms up to US Dollar 25,000, delegation of powers to exporters to
extend the realisation time, reduction of invoice value and write-off up to 10% of export due
to realisation and enhancement of export realisation period up to 12 months for EOUs, have
been effective in reducing the transaction cost.
         G. Raghuraj
                       Deputy General Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/ 1675