PRESS RELEASE 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
 
www.rbi.org.in 
 
www.rbi.org.in\hindi 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
 
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
 
December 27, 2006 
 
RBI releases ‘State Finances: A Study of Budgets of 2006-07’ 
 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today released ‘State Finances: A Study of 
Budgets of 2006-07’ – a publication that provides data, analysis and assessment of 
finances of State Governments. The publication provides data at both, consolidated 
and disaggregated levels based on the State budgets for 2006-07. Statistical tables 
appended to the publication provide information on several fiscal parameters as well 
as State-wise budgetary data covering both revenue and capital accounts. 
The data analysed in the publication highlight that there has been a marked 
improvement in the fiscal position of the State Governments in recent years in terms 
of key deficit indicators. In 2005-06, gross fiscal deficit (GFD) and revenue deficit 
(RD), as ratios to gross domestic product (GDP), have declined to 3.2 per cent and 
0.5 per cent, respectively. Such a correction has been primarily through revenue 
enhancement with revenue receipts, as ratio to GDP, rising by 1.0 per cent over the 
previous year and States’ own tax receipts rising by 0.3 per cent. Further, the revised 
estimates (RE) of 2005-06 point out that the fiscal performance of the State 
Governments has improved compared to the budget estimates, particularly in the 
revenue account, reversing the usual trend of decline in fiscal performance in the 
revised estimates.   
The State Governments have committed in their budgets to carry forward the 
process of fiscal correction and consolidation further in their budget for 2006-07. The 
consolidated fiscal position of State Governments in 2006-07 indicates that the 
States have budgeted to achieve near balance in the revenue account during 2006-
07. As a consequence of decline in the RD by 0.4 percentage points in 2006-07 
(budget estimates (BE)) over 2005-06 (RE), the GFD is budgeted to decline by the 
same extent to 2.8 per cent of GDP. Fiscal correction in the revenue account during 
2006-07 has been budgeted to be achieved primarily through revenue enhancement. 
The higher grants coupled with the incentives provided by the Twelfth Finance 
Commission (TFC) towards restructuring of State finances have aided the States in 
their endeavour for fiscal correction and consolidation. Notwithstanding the marked 
improvement in consolidated fiscal position of the State Governments during 2006-
07, there are wide variations across the States.  
The emerging issues on State finances, such as, fiscal correction and 
consolidation, fiscal rules and accounting arrangement, surplus cash balances, 
liquidity and investment management by States, fiscal empowerment, power 
subsidies have also been discussed in the publication. 
The publication notes that the States have the challenging task of continuing 
and sustaining fiscal correction, which would eventually translate into durable fiscal 
consolidation. The publication also suggests that the fiscally weak States, may 
consider initiating measures to catch up with the fiscally sound States. While lauding 
the enactment of fiscal responsibility legislation (FRLs) by majority of States that has 
ushered in a rule based fiscal policy framework at the State level, the Study suggests that the fiscal correction path under the FRLs would need to be realistic and should 
not adversely impact capital outlay and spending on social sectors. In fact, the Study 
suggests that bulk of the responsibilities pertaining to expenditure on social sectors 
is placed in the domain of State Governments and improvement in quality and 
delivery of social sectors may help in raising cost recovery in respect of these 
services.  
The Study notes that there has been sharp build-up of surplus cash balances 
of the State Governments in recent period as reflected in their investment in 14-Day 
Intermediate Treasury Bills due to several factors, which has posed challenges to the 
cash and financial management of the State Governments.  
The State Governments may emphasise fiscal empowerment to augment 
revenues, i.e., by expanding the scope and size of revenue flows into budget. This 
would provide them the necessary flexibility to shift the pattern of expenditure to 
redirect it for social sector and capital expenditure. In this context, apart from tax 
reforms, levying of appropriate user charges, rationalisation of subsidies (including 
power sector subsidies) and restructuring of State level public sector undertakings 
assume significance. Furthermore, the State Governments' strategy of augmenting 
tax mobilisation through improvement in tax administration and recovery of tax 
arrears needs to be continued with greater vigour.  
The publication has been prepared in the Division of State and Local 
Finances (DSLF) of the Department of Economic Analysis and Policy. Starting with 
2001-02, this publication is available at RBI website (www.rbi.org.in). Comments on 
this publication may be sent to Director, Division of State and Local Finances, 
Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, Shahid Bhagat 
Singh Road, Mumbai 400 001. Comments can also be sent via email. 
 
P.V.Sadanandan 
 Manager 
Press Release: 2006-2007/868 