PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 18, 2006
Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 2005-06
The Reserve Bank of India has today released the eighth volume of its annual
statistical publication Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 2005-06. This
publication is one of the major initiatives of the Reserve Bank aimed at improving data
dissemination by providing a useful storehouse of statistical information at one place.
Through this publication, the Reserve Bank has been providing time series data on
major economic and financial statistics for the Indian economy.
The current volume contains 256 statistical tables with the data series covering
national income aggregates, output, prices, money, banking, financial markets, public
finances, trade and balance of payments indicators. This volume also includes ten new
tables that provide time series information on principal characteristics of industry, gross
capital formation from budgetary resources of the central government, bank group-wise
total employment figures, non-performing loans to total loans of cooperative banks and
SHG-bank linkage programme and select ratios of scheduled commercial banks. In
addition, a new section titled 'Socio-Economic Indicators' has been included for the first
time and contains four tables pertaining to education, health and poverty.
The Handbook is brought out in three versions - print, CD-Rom and website. The
CD-Rom incorporates intelligent search facilities that allow users to search across
tables enabling the user to select one or more data series for a selected period from
any table. The web-version can be downloaded from the RBI website:
http://www.rbi.org.in.
Orders for the purchase can be placed with the Director, Division of Reports,
Reviews and Publications, Sales Section, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy,
Reserve Bank of India, Amar Building, Sixth Floor, P. M. Road, Mumbai – 400 001 on
payment through demand draft or cheque drawn in favour of the Reserve Bank of India,
payable at Mumbai only. The publication is also available for sale at all the Regional
Offices of the Reserve Bank of India in their reception and enquiry counters.
The publication in its print and CD-Rom version would be available for sale at the
Sales Section, Reserve Bank of India, Ground Floor, Amar Building, P.M. Road,
Mumbai -400 001. The inland price of the print version of the Handbook is Rs.200/-
(Rs.225/- inclusive of postage). Public libraries and educational institutions can
purchase the publication at a concessional price of Rs.170/- (inclusive of postage). The
price for the overseas buyer is US$ 25. The CD-Rom can be obtained for inland price of
Rs.120/- (Rs.140/- inclusive of postage) while Rs.100/- (inclusive of postage) is the
concessional price. The price for overseas buyer is fixed at US$ 15. The price package
for the combined purchase of the print and CD-Rom version is: Normal price Rs.300/-
(Rs.350/- inclusive of postage); Concessional Price Rs.270/- (inclusive of postage) and
Overseas Price US$ 30 (inclusive of postage). Courier charges are applied once for the
combined package.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/ 395    