PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
November 22, 2006
RBI releases Report of the Working Group to examine issues
relating to augmenting capital of UCBs
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today placed on its website (www.rbi.org.in) Report of
the Working Group to examine the issue of share capital of Primary (Urban) Co-operative
Banks (UCBs) and to identify alternate instruments / avenues for augmenting their capital
funds. Click here to send views/ suggestions on the recommendations of the Working Group  to
the Reserve Bank. The feedback can also be faxed to 91-22-24974030.
The Group has identified four new instruments to enable the UCBs to raise long term
capital/quasi capital funds. These are:
(i) Unsecured, subordinated, non-convertible redeemable debentures/bonds,
(ii) Special shares which are non-voting in nature (as opposed to shares with
membership rights) which could be issued even at a premium,
(iii) Redeemable cumulative preference shares, and
(iv) Long term subordinated deposits with maturity in excess of 15 years.
 The Group has recommended that the funds raised through the special shares which
are non-voting in nature (as opposed to shares with membership rights) which could be issued
even at a premium may be reckoned for Tier-I capital and the rest for Tier-II capital. None of
these instruments would have a put option but could have a call option exercisable by the bank
with the prior permission of the Reserve Bank.  Exercise of call option/redemption in case of
debentures/bonds and special shares would be subject to a lock-in clause of the bank meeting
the prescribed Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio at the relevant time.
Since UCBs come under the purview of the Co-operative Societies Act of the State in
which they are registered or the Multi-state Co-operative Societies Act (2002), the provisions of
which are not similar in certain respects, the Group has suggested necessary amendments to
the Acts/Rules framed under them to facilitate issuance of some of the instruments proposed by
it.
It may be recalled that an announcement was made in the Annual Policy Statement for
2006-07 to constitute a working group to examine the issue of share capital of UCBs and to
identify alternate instruments / avenues for augmenting their capital funds. Accordingly, a
Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri N.S. Vishwanathan, Chief
General Manager-in-Charge, Urban Banks Department, Reserve Bank of India. The other
members of the group were Shri Anil Diggikar*, Commissioner for Cooperation & Registrar of
Cooperative Societies (RCS), Government of Maharashtra, Shri J.C. Sharma, Commissioner for
Cooperation & RCS, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Shri D. Krishna, Chief Executive, National
Federation of Urban Cooperative Banks and Credit Societies Ltd  (NAFCUB), Prof. Mukund
Ghaisas, Chairman, Maharashtra State Urban Cooperative Banks Federation and Shri K. D.
Zacharias, Legal Adviser, Reserve Bank of India.
* In place of Dr. S. K. Sharma, who was initially the member of the Working Group in his capacity
as Commissioner for Cooperation & Registrar of Cooperative Societies, Government of
Maharashtra.
         Alpana Killawala
Press Release : 2006-2007/697                Chief General Manager