PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 1, 2006
Report of the Committee on Fuller CAC: RBI sets up Task Force
The Reserve Bank of India has today constituted an internal task force to re-
examine the extant regulations and make recommendations to remove the operational
impediments in the path of liberalisation already in place.
The Task Force will be convened by Shri Salim Gangadharan, CGM In-Charge,
Foreign Exchange Department, Reserve Bank of India and will have the following terms
of reference:
(a) Undertake a review of the extant regulations that straddle current and capital
accounts, especially items in one account that have implication for the other
account, and iron out inconsistencies in such regulations.
(b) Examine existing repatriation/surrender requirements in the context of current
account convertibility and management of capital account.
(c)  Identify areas where streamlining and simplification of procedure is possible
and remove the operational impediments, especially in respect of the ease
with which transactions at the level of authorized entities are conducted, so as
to make liberalisation more meaningful.
(d) Ensure that guidelines and regulations are consistent with regulatory intent.
(e) Review the delegation of powers on foreign exchange regulations between
Central Office and Regional offices of the RBI and inter alia, examine,
selectively, the efficacy in the functioning of the delegation of powers by RBI
to Authorised Dealers.
(f) Consider any other matter of relevance to the above.
The Task Force is empowered to devise its work procedure, constitute working
groups in various areas, co-opt permanent/special invitees and meet various trade
associations, representative bodies or individuals to facilitate its work.   It will make
recommendations on an ongoing basis to rectify the anomalies and remove operational
impediments.  The processes are expected to be completed by December 4, 2006.
The report submitted by the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
(Chairman, Shri S.S. Tarapore) has been placed on the RBI website today. The
Committee had, while considering fuller capital account convertibility, incidentally
observed that though the overall regime had undergone a significant degree of
liberalisation, in practice, some regulations relating to an earlier period of tight controls
continued to remain, giving rise to a disconnect between the regulatory intent and the
procedure in use.  It has, inter alia, recommended that a Reserve Bank of India task
force should be set up immediately to identify the anomalies in the present regulatory
framework for current and capital accounts and that rectification should be undertaken
within a period of three months.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2006-2007/321 