PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
                      e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
                                                                May 3, 2006
RBI Issues Guidelines For "When Issued" market
in Central Government Securities
The Reserve Bank of India has today issued guidelines on trading in Central
Government Securities on 'When Issued' (WI) basis by select participants.
'When Issued', a short form of "when as and if issued", indicates a conditional
transaction in a security authorised for issuance but not as yet actually issued.   All 'When
Issued' transactions are on an "if" basis, to be settled if and when the actual security is
issued. 'When Issued' market has two basic advantages:
(i) It facilitates the distribution process for Government securities by stretching
the actual distribution period for each issue and allowing the market more
time to absorb large issues without disruption; and
(ii) It also facilitates price discovery process by reducing uncertainties
surrounding auctions.
Salient features of the guidelines issued today are:
a. To start with 'WI' trades will be permitted in case of only reissued securities.
b. Only Primary Dealers will be allowed to take short positions in 'WI' securities,
and every 'WI' transaction will require at least one Primary Dealer as
counterparty.
c. Participants will be able to undertake 'WI' positions within prescribed limits.
Prescribed limits on 'WI' positions are:
i) Primary Dealer : 10% (long or short positions)
ii) Non Primary Dealers : 5% long positions
d. Internal control and reporting requirements have been prescribed for effective
control and regulation of 'WI' market.
Detailed guidelines are available on www.rbi.org.in
It may be noted that under the provisions of Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management (FRBM) Act, 2003, the Reserve Bank does not participate in the primary
issuance process of Central Government Securities effective April 1, 2006.  This
stipulation has fundamentally altered the paradigm of debt management function of the
Reserve Bank.  This has necessitated a comprehensive restructuring of the debt issuance
framework with a view to ensuring that while the debt issuance process remained entirely
market determined, the Reserve Bank's debt management objectives continue to be
achieved.  The Internal Technical Group on Central Government Securities of the Reserve
Bank constituted to examine the issues in the light of FRBM Act had recommended,
among other things, introduction of 'When Issued' market in Central Government
Securities.
Actual trading on ‘When Issued’ basis would commence from a date to be indicated
by the Reserve Bank, after necessary infrastructure is in place.
G.Raghuraj
     Deputy General  Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1415