PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 19, 2006
RBI expands coverage of its “Database on Indian Economy”
The Reserve Bank of India has today further expanded the coverage of its
"Database on Indian Economy" to include, among other things, static reports on foreign
exchange reserves, foreign exchange spot rates and certain other aspects of  financial
markets as well as commercial banking.
The additional static reports released  on the Database on Indian Economy today
are:
(a) Foreign Exchange Reserves – Year End, (b) Foreign Exchange Spot Rate (Daily) -
FEDAI, (c) Turnover in Government Securities Market (Face Value), (d) Government of
India Treasury Bills Outstanding, (e) Average daily turnover in Call Money Market, (f)
Commercial Paper Issued by Companies (At face value), (g) Abridged Balance Sheet of
Scheduled Commercial Banks Bank Group wise and (h) Financial Ratios of Selected
Public Limited Companies NIC-1998.
The additional data query reports now available on the Database on Indian
Economy are:
(a) Directory of branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks with Authorised Dealer
information, (b) Open Market Operation Sales/Purchases by RBI, (c) Ownership pattern
of deposits of Scheduled Commercial Banks –State-wise, (d) Ownership Pattern of
deposits in selected metropolitan cities, (e) Composition of deposits by type of deposits,
bank group-wise and (f) ownership of deposits with Scheduled Commercial Banks -
bank group-wise, sector-wise.
With the release of these data series, the Database on Indian Economy would
now have 139 static reports (subject and frequency wise), 67 subject wise and 53
frequency wise data query templates covering various sectors of the Indian economy.
The Reserve Bank of India's Database on Indian Economy is available on its
website (www.rbi.org.in) under the Database Section. This can also be directly
accessed through URL https://cdbmsi.reservebank.org.in/.  The home page of the
Database on Indian Economy lists the data series available on it. The coverage of the
Database is continuously being expanded on the basis of the feedback received from
the users of the database. The present expansion is the tenth such expansion release.
Users are requested to provide their feedback through a feedback link on the site
so as to enable further improvements in the coverage of data series in the system.
P.V. Sadanandan
Manager
Press Release : 2005-2006/1498