PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 20, 2006
Committee to set out Roadmap towards Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
Economic reforms in India have accelerated growth, enhanced stability and
strengthened both external and financial sectors. Our trade as well as financial sector is
already considerably integrated with the global economy. India's cautious approach
towards opening of the capital account and viewing capital account liberalisation as a
process contingent upon certain preconditions has stood India in good stead.
Given the changes that have taken place over the last two decades, however, there is
merit in moving towards fuller capital account convertibility within a transparent framework.
There is, thus, a need to revisit the subject and come out with a roadmap towards fuller
Capital Account Convertibility based on current realities. In consultation with the
Government of India, the Reserve Bank of India has appointed a committee to set out the
framework for fuller Capital Account Convertibility.
The Committee consists of the following:
(i) Shri S.S Tarapore                Chairman
(ii) Dr. Surjit S. Bhalla       Member
(iii) Shri M.G Bhide       Member
(iv) Dr. R.H. Patil       Member
(v) Shri A.V Rajwade       Member
(vi) Dr. Ajit Ranade           Member
The terms of reference of the Committee will be:
(i) To review the experience of various measures of capital account
liberalisation in India,
(ii) To examine implications of fuller capital account convertibility on monetary
and exchange rate management, financial markets and financial system,
(iii) To study the implications of dollarisation in India of domestic assets and
liabilities and internationalisation of the Indian rupee,
(iv) To provide a comprehensive medium-term operational framework, with
sequencing and timing, for fuller capital account convertibility taking into
account the above implications and progress in revenue and fiscal deficit of
both centre and states,(v) To survey regulatory framework in countries which have advanced towards
fuller capital account convertibility,
(vi) To suggest appropriate policy measures and prudential safe- guards to
ensure monetary and financial stability, and
(vii) To make such other recommendations as the Committee may deem
relevant to the subject.
Technical work is being initiated in the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee will
commence its work from May 1, 2006 and it is expected to submit its report by July 31,
2006.
The Committee will adopt its own procedures and meet as often as necessary. The
Reserve Bank of India will provide Secretariat to the Committee.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2005-06/1192