Guidelines for Setting up of Local
Area Banks in the Private Sector
August 24, 1996
With a  view to providing institutional  mechanisms for promoting rural savings
as well as for the provision of credit for viable economic activities in the local areas, it
has been decided to allow the establishment of new local banks in the private sector.  This
is expected to bridge the gaps in credit availability and  enhance the institutional credit
framework in the rural and semi-urban areas.  The following are the guidelines for
establishment of the new local banks:
Object
Setting up of local area banks in private sector to cater to the credit needs of the
local people and to provide efficient  and competitive financial intermediation  services in
their area of operation.
Scope of Activities
Since these banks are being set up in district towns, their activities will be
focussed on the local customers.  It is expected that their lendings will be to agriculture
and allied activities, SSI, agro-industrial activities, trading activities and the non-farm
sector with a view to ensuring the provision of timely and adequate credit to the local
clientele in the area of operation.  The banks will observe the priority sector lending
targets at 40% of net bank credit (NBC) as applicable to other domestic banks.  Within
the above target these banks will adhere to the requirement of lending at least 25% of
their priority sector deployments (10% of NBC) to the weaker sections.  This will be
monitored strictly and on an ongoing basis.
Registration, Licensing : Scheduling
The bank shall be registered as a public limited company under the Companies
Act, 1956.  It will be  licensed under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and will be
eligible for including in the Second Schedule of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
Capital
The minimum paid up capital for such a bank shall be Rs.5 crore.  The promoters'
contribution for such a bank shall at  least be Rs.2 crore.  Proposals having diversified
share holdings, will be preferred.
Promoters
The promoters of the bank may comprise individuals, corporate entities, trusts and
societies.  In the application for a banking  licence the details of the initial contribution ofpromoters, and the manner and method through which the minimum share capital of Rs.5
crore will be raised will need to be  indicated.
Area of Operation
The area of operation of the proposed bank shall be a maximum of three
geographically contiguous districts.
Head Office
The Head/Registered Office of the bank will be located at a centre within the area
of operation of the bank.
Voting Rights
Voting rights of an individual share holder shall be governed by the ceiling of 10
% of the total voting rights as stipulated in Section 12(2) of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949.
Applicability of Statutes
The bank  will be governed by  the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India
 Act 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and other relevant statutes. However, in
regard to its liquidity requirements and interest rates, such banks will be governed by the
provisions applicable to Regional Rural Banks established under the Regional Rural
Banks Act, 1976.
Prudential Norms
Such a bank shall be subject to prudential norms, accounting policies and other
policies as are laid down by RBI.  The bank will have to achieve capital adequacy of 8
per cent of the risk weighted assets from the very beginning.  Similarly, norms for income
recognition, asset classification and provisioning will also be applicable to it from the
beginning.
Branch Licensing
The bank shall be allowed to open branches only in its area of operation and in
regard to branch licensing, it shall be governed by the existing policy.
GeneralThe bank will have to comply with the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and abide by all guidelines, directives,
instructions or advices of the RBI as may be in force from time to time.
Applications in the form prescribed under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,
backed by a project report for the establishment of such banks should be forwarded to the
Chief General Manager, Rural Planning and Credit Department, Central Office, Reserve
Bank of India, Mumbai-400 001.
P.T.Achuthan
Manager
Press Release : 1996-97/103