 
?  ????????   PRESS RELEASE 
 
??????  ????  ?? ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  ?????,  ??????  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
? ????? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? ???/Fax: 91 22 22660358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
 
July 31, 2012 
 
First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, 
 Reserve Bank of India 
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, a warm  welcome to all of you. 
2. This morning, we put out the First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 
2012-13. Based on an assessment of the current macroeconomic situation, we have 
decided to keep the policy rate and the CRR unchanged. Accordingly, the repo rate 
stays at 8 per cent and the CRR at 4.75 per cent of net demand and time liabilities 
(NDTL) of scheduled banks.  
3. Consequently, the reverse repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), 
determined with a spread of 100 basis points below the repo rate, remains at 7 per 
cent. Similarly, the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate, which has a spread of 
100 bps above the repo rate, also stands unchanged at 9 per cent. 
4. Separately, we have decided to reduce the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) of 
scheduled commercial banks from 24 per cent to 23 per cent of their NDTL with 
effect from the fortnight beginning August 11, 2012. 
Considerations Behind the Policy Move 
5. Let me explain the rationale behind this monetary policy stance.  
6. The first question is: what is the rationale for our decision to hold the policy 
interest rate and the CRR unchanged? The rationale draws from our assessment of 
the growth-inflation dynamics.   
• As regards inflation, the headline WPI inflation has remained sticky, above 7 
per cent. This has been on account of increase in food prices, increase in 
input costs, and upward revision in prices of some administered items such as 
coal. Headline inflation has persisted even as growth has moderated and the 
pricing power of corporates has weakened. Non-food manufactured products 
inflation has also not declined to the extent warranted by the growth 
moderation. This reflects severe supply constraints and entrenchment of 
inflation expectations.    
• Now coming to growth. Growth last year was 6.5 per cent, down from 8.4 per 
cent in the year before. Although more recent data suggest some pick up, the 
overall economic activity remains subdued. In order to assess inflationary 
implications, we need to see the current growth rate in comparison to the 
trend growth rate. The Reserve Bank’s estimates suggest that the post crisis 
trend rate of growth, which was earlier estimated to be 8.0 per cent, has 
dropped to 7.5 per cent. This means that the current rate of growth is lower 
than the trend. However, the output gap, which is the difference between the 
?null???????null?????2 
 
actual and trend rate of growth, will remain relatively small. Under these 
conditions, demand pressures on inflation can re-emerge quite quickly, 
exacerbating the existing supply pressures. 
7. The second question on our policy stance is about the decision to reduce the 
SLR by 1 percentage point. Liquidity conditions play an important role in the 
transmission of monetary policy signals. Although the liquidity situation has eased 
significantly in the recent period, the reduction of SLR is expected to ensure that 
liquidity pressures do not constrain the flow of credit to the productive sectors of the 
economy. This will allow banks to shift their portfolio in favour of the private sector.   
Monetary Policy Stance 
8. Let me now spell out the three broad contours of our  monetary policy stance. 
These are: 
• first, to contain inflation and anchor inflation expectations; 
• second, to support a sustainable growth path over the medium term; and  
• third, to continue to provide liquidity to facilitate credit availability to productive 
sectors. 
Guidance 
9.       As per standard practice, we have also given guidance for the period forward. 
I will give the gist of that.   
10. The primary focus of monetary policy remains inflation control. Low and stable 
inflation is an essential pre-condition for securing sustainable growth over the 
medium term. While monetary actions over the past two years may have 
contributed to the growth slowdown – which is an unavoidable consequence – 
several other factors have also played a significant role. In the current 
circumstances, lowering policy rates will only aggravate inflationary impulses 
without necessarily stimulating growth. As the multiple constraints to growth 
are addressed, the Reserve Bank will suitably adjust its monetary policy 
stance.   
 
11. Meanwhile, managing liquidity within the comfort zone remains an objective. 
The Reserve Bank will respond to liquidity pressures, including by way of 
open market operations (OMOs). 
 
12. In the current uncertain and turbulent global environment, the risk of external 
shocks is high. The Reserve Bank stands ready to respond to any such 
shocks swiftly, using all available instruments. 
Expected Outcomes 
13. We expect that today’s policy actions, and the guidance that we have given, 
will result in the following two outcomes: 
• First, inflation expectations will be anchored based on the commitment of monetary 
policy to control inflation; and    
• Second, liquidity will be maintained to facilitate smooth flow of credit to the 
productive sectors of the economy and thereby support growth.  
Global and Domestic Developments 
14. Our policy decisions have been based on a careful assessment of the global 
and domestic macroeconomic situation. Let me begin with our assessment of 
the global economy.  3 
 
Global Economy  
15. Since the Annual Monetary Policy Statement in April 2012, global 
macroeconomic conditions have deteriorated. There was some upward 
momentum in the early months of this year. But that has since petered out. 
Much of the global economy is now in a synchronised slowdown. Despite the 
slowing global economy, the outlook for commodity prices is uncertain. In the 
euro area, the possibility of an immediate default has been averted, but the 
situation continues to cause concern.   
16. The two-speed recovery around the world that we were talking about a year 
ago has now dissipated. Economic activity in emerging and developing 
economies too has started slowing, but for most of them, inflation has also 
come down. India is clearly an outlier because even as our growth is slowing 
in line with the rest of the world, our inflation continues to be high.  
Indian Economy 
17. Moving on to the domestic macroeconomic situation, GDP growth last year 
was 6.5 per cent, below the Reserve Bank’s projection of 7 per cent. In fact, 
growth decelerated over four successive quarters from 9.2 per cent in the 
fourth quarter of 2010-11 to 5.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011-12. The 
growth slowdown was a result of deceleration in  industrial growth as well as 
in services sector activity.  
18. Coming to the current year, in the April Policy, we projected GDP growth of 
7.3 per cent on the assumption of a normal monsoon and improvement in 
industrial activity. Both these assumptions have not held. The monsoon has 
been deficient and uneven so far. Also, data on industrial production for April-
May suggest that industrial activity remains weak.  
19. In addition, the risk from the global situation has intensified. Global growth 
and trade volume are now expected to be lower than projected earlier. Given 
the greater integration of the Indian economy with the global economy, this 
will have an adverse impact on growth, particularly in industry and the 
services sectors.  
20. On the basis of the above considerations, the growth projection for the current 
year (2012-13) has been revised downwards from 7.3 per cent to 6.5 per cent. 
Inflation 
21. Let me now turn to inflation. Headline WPI inflation increased from 7.5 per 
cent in April to 7.6 per cent in May before moderating to 7.3 per cent in June 
2012. The stickiness in inflation, despite the significant growth slowdown, was 
largely on account of high primary food inflation, which was in double-digits 
during the first quarter of this year driven by a spike in vegetable prices and 
sustained high inflation in protein items.  
22. Fuel group inflation moderated from 12.1 per cent in April 2012 to 11.5 per 
cent in May and further to 10.3 per cent in June on account of a decline in 
non-administered fuel prices. However, the reversal in crude oil prices in 
recent weeks may add to inflationary pressure.   
23. Non-food manufactured products inflation was at 4.8 per cent in May and 
June 2012. However, input price pressures persist due to both exchange rate 
movements and supply side constraints. Going forward, further pressure on 
non-food manufactured products inflation cannot be ruled out.  4 
 
24. In contrast to WPI inflation, CPI inflation, as measured by the new Consumer 
Price Index, remained in double-digits in the first quarter. This was driven by 
both food and non-food prices. The divergence between WPI and CPI inflation 
was on account of differences in the composition and weights of commodities 
in the two indices, as well as different rates of price increases for similar 
commodities represented in both indices.  
25. In the April Policy, the Reserve Bank made a baseline projection of WPI 
inflation for March 2013 of 6.5 per cent. However, since then several upside 
risks have arisen:  
• First, the monsoon has been deficient and uneven so far. This will have an 
adverse impact on food inflation.  
• Second, notwithstanding  some moderation, international crude prices remain 
elevated. On top of that, the rupee depreciation has added to import prices, 
putting upward pressure on domestic fuel prices.  
• Third, the adjustment of domestic prices of petroleum products to international 
price changes is still incomplete. Going forward, the embedded risks of 
suppressed inflation could also impact fuel prices in India.  
• Fourth, non-food manufactured products inflation has not moderated in line 
with the slowdown in growth.  
• And finally, input price pressures on account of exchange rate movement and 
infrastructural bottlenecks in coal, minerals and power may exert upward 
pressure on non-food manufactured products inflation.  
  
26. Keeping in view the recent trends in food inflation, trends in global commodity 
prices and the likely demand scenario, the baseline projection for WPI 
inflation for March 2013 is now raised from our April projection of 6.5 per cent 
to 7.0 per cent. 
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
27. Let me now turn to monetary and liquidity conditions. With nominal growth 
remaining broadly at the level envisaged in the April Policy, monetary 
aggregates are expected to move along the trajectories projected in the 
Monetary Policy Statement 2012-13. Accordingly, M growth projection this 
3
year has been retained at 15 per cent and the growth in non-food credit of 
scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) at 17 per cent.  
28. Liquidity conditions have eased considerably since the April Policy. This 
turnaround was due to a decline in government cash balances with the 
Reserve Bank, injection of liquidity of about `860 billion by way of open 
market operations (OMOs) and increased use of export credit refinance 
facility by banks after the increase in the limit effected in the June Mid-Quarter 
Review.  
Risk Factors 
29. Our projections of growth and inflation for 2012-13 are subject to a number of 
risks.  
• First, external risks to the outlook for the Indian economy are intensifying. 
Adverse feedback loops between sovereign and financial market stress in the 
euro area are resulting in increased risk aversion, financial market volatility, 
and perverse movements in capital flows. With the deteriorating 5 
 
macroeconomic situation in the euro area interacting with a loss of growth 
momentum in the US and in emerging and developing economies, the risk of 
potentially large negative spillovers has increased. India’s growth prospects 
too will be hurt by this.  
• Second, reflecting the setbacks to the global recovery, as also weather-
related adversities in several parts of the world, the outlook for food and 
commodity prices, especially of crude oil, has turned uncertain. These 
developments have adverse implications for domestic growth and inflation.  
• Third, inflation in protein items remains elevated due to structural demand 
supply imbalances. On top of that, there will be further pressure on food 
inflation because of the deficient and uneven monsoon, thus potentially 
aggravating inflation and inflation expectations. 
•  And finally, at current levels of current account and fiscal deficits, the Indian 
economy faces the “twin deficit” risk. Financing the fiscal deficit from domestic 
savings crowds out private investment, thus lowering growth prospects. This, 
in turn, deters capital inflows, making it more difficult to finance the current 
account deficit. Failure to narrow the twin deficits with appropriate policy 
actions will threaten both macroeconomic stability and growth sustainability.    
30. Let me now conclude by summarising our macroeconomic concerns. While 
growth has slowed down significantly, inflation remains well above the comfort 
zone of the Reserve Bank. Against the backdrop of heightened global 
uncertainty and domestic macroeconomic pressures, the challenge for 
monetary policy is to maintain its commitment to firmly containing inflation and 
lowering inflation expectations. At the same time, monetary policy will remain 
sensitive to growth risks. I also want to reiterate that the Reserve Bank stands 
ready to respond to external shocks that may arise from the turbulent global 
environment. 
31.     Thank you for your attention." 
 
 
      R. R. Sinha 
Press Release : 2012-2013/164                              Deputy General Manager 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 