 
? ?  ??????  PRESS RELEASE 
 
?????? null???   ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ???  null???? ,  ??null?  ???? ??,  ??. ??. ??. ???, ????400001 
? ???? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai?400001 
???/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? null? /Fax: 91 22 22660358  ?? ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
 
August 23, 2012 
RBI releases Annual Report for 2011-12
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Annual Report for 2011-12, a 
statutory Report of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank. It covers (i) the 
assessment of the macroeconomic performance during 2011-12 and the prospects 
for 2012-13, and (ii) the working and operations of the Reserve Bank and its financial 
accounts for the year 2011-12. Highlights of the Report: 
• Inflation slowed in response to past monetary tightening and growth 
deceleration in 2011-12. Growth during 2012-13 is expected to stay below 
trend at around the same level as in the previous year. Inflation is likely to 
remain sticky around 7 per cent with upside risks emanating from a deficient 
monsoon.  
• Concurrently, the risk of twin deficits has accentuated causing concern for 
macro-financial stability. With limited fiscal and monetary space available to 
provide direct stimulus to growth without stoking inflation, an expenditure 
switching strategy is needed that reduces government’s revenue spending by 
cutting subsidies with a step up in capital expenditure to crowd-in private 
investment.  
• Over the medium-term, addressing issues impeding infrastructure investment 
have become important for stepping up India’s growth potential which has 
been dented post-crisis. While the Reserve Bank is focusing on price stability 
and sustainable growth over the medium-term keeping in view its welfare 
implications, the human face of its financial policy can be buttressed with a 
greater thrust on effective financial inclusion. 
Assessment for 2011-12
• Growth decelerated in 2011-12 to below the economy’s potential due to 
domestic and global factors. Inflation persistence and widening twin deficits 
constrained the Reserve Bank’s ability for counter-cyclical measures. Going 
forward, the priority should be to bring down the twin deficits to support 
potential growth even if it means a slower pace of recovery in the short run 
(para I.1 and para I.6).  
• After two years, high inflation moderated in the later part of 2011-12 in 
response to past monetary tightening and growth deceleration. High inflation 
had adverse consequences on welfare and on saving and investment, 
particularly household saving in financial assets (para I.2).  
• The most serious consequence of inflation is its adverse distributional impact 
on the poor, people without social security and pensioners. As growth slowed 
down, in part due to high inflation, it further reduced the welfare of the 
common man through adverse impact on employment and incomes (para I.3). 
?nullnull???nullnullnull??2 
 
• In view of the adverse welfare consequences and its impact on growth, the 
Reserve Bank combated high inflation through monetary tightening. Several 
other factors combined with monetary tightening caused growth to slow down 
(para I.4). 
• Interest rates increased during 2011-12 and may have impacted investment, 
but they are clearly not the primary reason for downturn. Computation from 
accounts-level data shows that real (net of inflation) Weighted Average 
Lending Rates (WALR) was 3.8 per cent in 2011-12, lower than the average 
of about 7.0 per cent in the pre-crisis period of 2003-04 to 2007-08 when 
investment had boomed (para I.10-I.11).  
• Fiscal consolidation is needed to sustain growth and reduce inflation. 
Subsidies have risen from 1.3 per cent of GDP in 2005-06 to 2.4 per cent of 
GDP in 2011-12. Revenue constraints make it impossible to finance them in a 
sustainable manner. Resource mobilisation has been insufficient and there is 
a need to push tax reforms (para I.17-23). 
• Deterioration in asset quality of banks emerged as a concern during 2011-12, 
especially in case of public sector banks. While some of it was the result of 
economic slowdown, sector-specific issues needs to be resolved. With 
increasing restructuring there is a need for doing way with regulatory 
forbearance and introducing a principle of higher amount of promoters’ 
sacrifice to bring about lending discipline (para I.24-I.28).    
Prospects for 2012-13
Growth outlook
• Growth in 2012-13 is expected to stay below trend at around the previous 
year’s level of 6.5 per cent. Growth outlook remains weak as factors that 
slowed down growth in the previous year persist and show no signs of getting 
resolved. The government in August 2012 promised to take several steps to 
address macro-economic weakness. As these steps materialise, growth could 
gradually start to improve later this year and trend growth could be restored 
next year (para I.29-30). 
• Newer uncertainties for growth have emerged from unsatisfactory monsoon 
so far, which is likely to result in contraction in foodgrains output in 2012-13 
(para I.32). 
• In absence of signs of global conditions improving, the burden of adjustment 
would have to be borne by domestic policies. Structural impediments 
impacting business confidence needs to be addressed immediately, 
especially in mining and infrastructure sector. Fast-tracking of infrastructure 
projects will help boost investment (para I.34). 
• With limited fiscal and monetary space available to provide a direct stimulus, 
an expenditure-switching policy is needed that reduces revenue spending by 
cutting subsidies and using the resources so released to step up public capital 
expenditures. This would provide some space for monetary policy, but lower 
interest rates alone are unlikely to jumpstart investment cycle (para I.34).   
Inflation outlook
• Inflation is likely to remain sticky at around 7 per cent with upside risks 
emanating from deficient monsoon, large upward revision in Minimum Support 
Prices (MSP) on the back of cost escalation and exchange rate depreciation 
during Q1 of 2012-13 (para I.34). 3 
 
• Latest assessment suggests that there could be considerable upside pressure 
on price of pulses. The prevailing drought in parts of US, Eurasia and 
Australia may add to price pressures on food in global markets. Other upside 
risks arise from suppressed inflation in energy prices of diesel, coal and 
electricity (para I.36-I.37).  
• While inflation risks in 2012-13 are on the upside, there is a need to 
distinguish between temporary and permanent supply shocks. If left 
unchecked, persistent inflation could unhinge inflation expectations. 
Furthermore, demand pressures emanating from high rural wages and 
growing corporate staff costs would need to be factored in. A close vigil on 
inflation would be necessary during 2012-13 to prevent reemergence of 
inflationary pressures (para I.39).  
Need to address twin deficits to contain risk to macro-financial stability
• The emergence of twin deficits during 2011-12 was a major cause of macro-
economic weakness. Current assessment suggests that they are likely to stay 
wide in 2012-13 in absence of sufficient policy response and no improvement 
in business cycle conditions (para I.40). 
• With growth remaining slow, budgetary targets are at risk. Shortfall in indirect 
tax revenue, decline in corporate earnings, difficulties with disinvestment and 
expenditure overshooting due to under-provision of petroleum subsidies are 
likely to put fiscal position under pressure (para I.41). 
• Consequently, some level of fiscal slippage is unavoidable. Estimates suggest 
that if no revision is made in administered fuel prices, this slippage may turn 
out to be about 0.4 per cent of GDP at the current level of crude prices on this 
account alone. Such slippage could crowd-out private investment at a time 
when reviving investment, both public and private, is critical. This could 
through higher aggregate demand then spill over to higher inflation and wider 
current account deficit (CAD) (para I.41). 
• CAD risks are maintained and overall CAD-GDP ratio may not correct 
significantly in 2012-13. Even though merchandise trade balance narrowed in 
Q1 of 2012-13, net services exports were 22 per cent lower on a year-on-year 
basis. Software exports are likely to moderate as global IT spending is 
expected to be lower (para I.46). 
• With a lower growth, the sustainable level of CAD is now assessed at around 
2.5 per cent of GDP. It is important not only to focus on financing of CAD, but 
also on compressing it to lower manageable levels (para I.47).  
• In recent period, CAD has been managed by improving debt inflows. 
However, this has long-term costs for debt sustainability and increase 
refinancing risk over time. Therefore, there is urgent need to step-up non-debt 
creating inflows, especially in form of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) (para 
I.47).    
Medium-term Challenges for the Indian Economy
Key to improving growth lies in addressing medium-term challenges. Three 
illustrative medium-term challenges highlighted in the Report are: 
(i) Preserving India’s growth story through revival of infrastructure 
investments.  
• India’s growth story in recent past has been substantially driven by large 
infrastructure investments. However, new investments have slowed down and 4 
 
existing investments are at risk. Elongated gestation periods and input supply 
shortages have affected the viability of projects going on-stream (para I.48) . 
• The Reserve Bank’s collation from banks and financial institutions show that 
envisaged total fixed investments in new projects that were sanctioned 
financial assistance during 2011-12 dropped by 46 per cent to about `2.1 
trillion. This drop was led by infrastructure and metals. Envisaged investment 
in infrastructure declined by 52 per cent to `1 trillion with power and telecom 
accounting for most of this fall (para I.49).  
• Road projects have also slowed down due to problems relating to land 
acquisition, legal and environmental clearances as also tightening of financial 
conditions. Road tendering activity has suffered significantly in Q1 of 2012-13 
after a record tendering by NHAI in 2011-12 (para I.53).  
• Investment climate in power sector has been affected by State Electricity 
Board (SEB) losses and coal supply shortages. As much as 54GW of power 
th
capacity has been created during 11 Plan and another 60-75 GW of capacity 
th
may be planned during 12 Plan. A large part of this capacity is facing coal 
linkage issue. All pending issues in respect of proposed new Fuel Supply 
agreements (FSAs) and coal block auction need to be resolved without any 
further delay (para I.51).  
• There is need to make doing business easy by adopting models like the one 
in Singapore, where multiple agencies/ Ministries sit together to quickly give 
its decision clearing investment projects. Businesses also need to re-jig their 
strategies and aim at operating in a more competitive environment earning 
normal profits within the legal and environmental framework and not try to 
exploit rules and weak regulation (para I.52).    
(ii) Strengthening banking soundness through Basel III.  
• The Reserve Bank has issued guidelines for implementation of Basel III 
capital regulation to be completed in a phased manner by March 31, 2018. In 
these, the minimum capital requirements have been kept one percentage 
above the minimum suggested by the Basel Committee (para I.59). 
• Broad estimates suggest that for full implementation of Basel III, public sector 
banks would require common equity to the tune of `1.4-1.5 trillion on top of 
internal accruals, in addition to `2.65-2.75 trillion in form of non-equity capital. 
Major private sector banks would require common equity to the tune of `200-
250 billion on top of internal accruals, in addition to `500-600 billion in form of 
non-equity capital (para I.62). 
• There have been some arguments whether the regulatory regime could be 
softer for public sector banks given the backstop that they enjoy with the 
government as the principal owner and stakeholder in such banks. From a 
regulatory standpoint, this would be detrimental for the financial system. The 
Reserve Bank is committed towards developing level playing field for all 
banks irrespective of the ownership (para I.63).    
(iii) Financial inclusion, led by the Reserve Bank policies with a human face.  
• To impart a human face to the bank lending policies, the Reserve Bank has 
supported directed lending route as an integral part of its bank lending 
policies. As part thereof, banks priority sector lending target for foreign banks 
with 20 or more branches has been raised from 32 per cent to 40 per cent 
(para I.66). 5 
 
• Notwithstanding the efforts, a recent World Bank study has revealed the 
dismal state of financial inclusion world-wide and even more so in India. India 
scored poorly on financial inclusion parameters than the global average in 
respect of percentage of population with formal accounts, credit cards, 
outstanding mortgages, health insurance, origination of new loans and mobile 
banking (para I.69). 
• The Reserve Bank has adopted ICT-based bank agent model through 
Business Correspondents (BCs). This model has not been very successful in 
addressing financial inclusion needs and cannot substitute the services of 
brick and mortar bank branches. There is need for mainstreaming financial 
inclusion, while at the same time improving the BC functioning (para I.71).  
• The Reserve Bank’s assessment is that financial inclusion is a substantially 
unfinished agenda and the efforts need to be upscaled. The change from no-
frills account to ‘Basic Saving Bank Deposit Account’ is an effort to integrate 
them as part of basic banking services. Financial inclusion may result in short 
term pressure on banks’ profitability, but as size and scope of banking 
increase, it would add to their revenue stream (para I.72). 
Real Economy
• In 2012-13, the south-west monsoon (up to August 16, 2012) was 16 per cent 
below the long period average. The deficiency as measured by the Reserve 
Bank’s production-weighted rainfall index is even higher at 21 per cent. This 
has affected the kharif sowing with sowing for coarse cereals and pulses 
being 16 per cent and 12 per cent below normal, respectively. However, 
drought conditions are less severe than that during the 2009 (para II.1.16-
II.1.18). 
• Preliminary estimates show that the net financial saving of the household 
declined further to 7.8 per cent of GDP at current market prices during 2011-
12 from 9.3 per cent in the previous year and 12.2 per cent in 2009-10. This 
was due to an absolute decline in small savings and slower growth in 
households’ holdings of bank deposits, currency as well as life funds. High 
inflation and proclivity for investment in gold could have impacted household 
saving behaviour (para II.1.11).  
Price Situation
• In recent period output gap has contributed to moderating inflation, but the 
moderation has been less in relation to fall in growth. Reserve Bank’s 
empirical estimates show that output gap is a leading indicator of inflation. 
However, the pace and extent of moderation could be conditional on other 
determinants such as supply shocks from food, global commodity price 
movements, exchange rate pass-through, as well as the overall fiscal position 
(Box II.2). 
• Cost-push inflation caused by sustained wage pressures is a dominant 
determinant of inflation. In India, wages in rural areas have increased at a 
faster rate than inflation, partly as MGNREGS is exerting pressure on the 
overall wage structure. Empirical estimates suggest a bi-directional causality 
between wage growth and prices, implying that there is some evidence of a 
wage-price spiral (Box II.8). 
Money and Credit
• Monetary and liquidity conditions in the year 2011-12 were marked by two 
distinct phases. In the first half, monetary policy was tightened and liquidity 6 
 
conditions generally remained in line with the policy objective of maintaining 
moderate deficit. In the second half, the Reserve Bank paused its tightening 
cycle. Liquidity deficit, however, worsened due to forex interventions and 
sudden build up of government cash balances that persisted for a longer 
duration para II.3.1).  
• In recent years there is significant evidence that the interest rate channels and 
credit channels of monetary transmission have been working effectively. 
Policy rate increases in India had a negative effect on output growth with a lag 
of two quarters and moderating effect on inflation with a lag of three quarters. 
As banks adjust portfolios, a 100 bps increase in policy rate was found to 
reduce credit by 2.8 per cent in nominal terms and 2.2 per cent in real terms 
(Box II.10).  
Financial Markets
• A financial conditions indexed developed in-house shows that though financial 
conditions somewhat worsened in 2011-12 mainly due to stock and forex 
markets; however, they remain far better than in October 2008 (Box II.12). 
• With housing and gold prices running ahead of inflation, there is a need for 
containing risks. The Reserve Bank will continue to monitor the asset prices 
ahead from a macro-prudential angle (para II.4.25). 
Government Finance
• Current indications are that fiscal targets can again be missed in 2012-13, 
unless immediate remedial measures are undertaken. The risks to fiscal 
targets laid down for 2012-13 are large if the envisaged tax buoyancies are 
not realised and the cap on subsidies is not adhered to. During the first 
quarter of 2012-13, the fiscal deficit of the central government was more than 
one third of the budget estimate for the whole year (para II.5.3). 
• Estimates of fiscal multipliers for India show that while impact multiplier on 
growth is higher for revenue and expenditures, the long-run multiplier is higher 
for capital outlays. In this context, credible fiscal consolidation accompanied 
with higher capital outlay is crucial for improving long-run growth prospects 
(Box II.16). 
External Sector
• CAD-GDP ratio reached 4.5 per cent in Q4 of 2011-12, taking the full year 
ratio reached to an all-time high of 4.2 per cent. Going forward, the 
moderation in global oil prices from the earlier highs and softening of gold 
imports if sustained, are likely to have a favourable impact on CAD. 
Notwithstanding these factors, CAD may still stay wide enough to put strains, 
especially if capital flows remain moderate (para II.6.2-II.6.3). 
• In view of the high dependence on debt flows to finance CAD during 2011-12, 
there is need for policy initiatives to augment non-debt creating flows, 
especially by improving FDI inflows into sectors such as insurance, retail, 
aviation and urban infrastructure. In recent years outward FDI has increased 
significantly and there is a need to balance the domestic investment interests 
in the overall FDI policy (para II.6.16).  
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
Working and Operations of the Reserve Bank of India
Monetary Policy Operations
• Monetary policy in 2011-12 had to address the risks of entrenchment of 
inflation pressures and unhinged inflation expectations during the first half of 
the financial year and the significant slowdown in domestic growth even while 
maintaining its anti-inflationary stance during the second half.  
• During 2012-13 so far, on growing evidence of slowdown in the economy, the 
Reserve Bank used available space to cut policy rates and frontloaded the 
policy action in April 2012, but maintained status quo later as inflation 
concerns persisted. It reduced Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) in July 2012 to 
provide liquidity to facilitate credit availability to productive sectors (para 
III.19).  
Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion
• Improving credit delivery and financial inclusion have remained key priorities 
of the Reserve Bank. One major step in this direction was to introduce 
biometric smart card system for the kisan credit card (KCC), to be used in 
ATMs and hand held devices. The financial inclusion plan (FIP), under which 
the commercial banks set their targets for financial inclusion activities, has 
been making substantial progress (para IV.6). 
• The Reserve Bank has recently issued guidelines on the implementation of 
electronic benefit transfer (EBT) and its convergence with FIP. Apart from 
providing a whole range of banking services, this will enable the beneficiaries 
to get the social security benefits (Box IV.2).  
Development and Regulation of Financial Markets
• As the Indian financial markets, particularly foreign exchange market, turned 
volatile against the backdrop of weakening domestic macroeconomic 
fundamentals and the euro area sovereign debt crisis since august 2011, the 
Reserve Bank took a slew of measures to contain the volatility in the forex 
market and encourage foreign inflows (para V.22-V.31).  
• The Reserve Bank also continued with its efforts to impart liquidity to the 
secondary G-sec market and to develop the corporate bond market further by 
providing for risk transfers. The Working Group on Enhancing Liquidity in the 
G-sec and Interest Rate Derivatives Market has made important 
recommendations in this respect (Box V.1).  
Regulation, Supervision and Financial Stability
• During 2011-12, the banking sector remained robust with high capital 
adequacy, even though rising NPA levels emerged as a concern. The NPAs, 
however, are in part a reflection of overall slowdown in the economy. An 
analysis using data since June 2000 brings out this pro-cyclicality in asset 
quality of Indian banks (Box VI.1). 
• The Reserve Bank has undertaken several initiatives like faster grievances 
redressal mechanism, facilitating better banking experience for the disabled 
and intra-bank transfer of deposit facility to benefit the common man (para 
VI.42-VI.61). 
• The NBFC sector in India has undergone a significant transformation in the 
past few years, with growth of non-deposit taking systemically important 
NBFCs. In this backdrop, risks from regulatory gaps, arbitrage and systemic 8 
 
interconnectedness have assumed importance. A Reserve Bank Working 
Group has made several recommendations to address these (Box VI.5).  
Public Debt Management
• With in?ation persisting at a high level, it would be a challenge to manage the 
relatively higher budgeted market borrowings of the central government as 
also the expected elevated level of borrowings of the state governments in 
2012-13. In an environment of slowing growth and given the limited options 
regarding debt management, it is crucial that the ?scal de?cit and its ?nancing 
by way of market borrowings do not escalate beyond the budgeted level (para 
VII.13).  
• Re?ecting the impact of the change in interest rate cycle and large 
government borrowing, the weighted average yield of dated securities issued 
by the central government during 2011-12 rose by 60 basis points to 8.52 per 
cent. Also, the weighted average yield of state government securities issued 
during 2011-12 was higher at 8.79 per cent, compared with 8.39 per cent 
during the previous year (para VII.8). 
Currency Management
• During 2011-12, the Reserve Bank continued with its efforts to strengthen 
security features of banknotes and increase public awareness to address the 
challenge of counterfeit notes (para VIII.2).  
• There was a marked decline in the volume and value of small coins in 
circulation in 2011-12 as coins of denomination of 25 paise and below ceased 
to be legal tender from June 30, 2011. A committee constituted by the 
government is examining the issues relating to the increase in demand for 
coins and supply/distribution bottlenecks (Box VIII.2).  
Payment and Settlement Systems and Information Technology
• The Reserve Bank continued its efforts at enhancing safety, security and 
efficiency of payment transactions coupled with low transaction costs and 
better risk management for system participants and to also improve the 
accessibility and affordability of the payment and settlement systems para 
IX.16). 
• The Reserve Bank has furthered its social responsibility by enabling payment 
system services at low costs by promoting systems such as Indian Financial 
Network (INFINET) and Next Generation Real Time Gross Settlement (NG-
RTGS) systems. 
Governance, Human Resource Development and Organisational Management
• The Reserve Bank has initiated several measures to enhance its 
communication strategy to the public, apart from improved transparency in its 
governance. Though the governance practices by boards of the central banks 
differ widely, the Reserve Bank has taken several initiatives to improve 
transparency and accountability (Box X.1). 
• The Reserve Bank has also taken several capacity building initiatives with a 
view to acquiring, grooming and enhancing the quality of its human resources. 
It has also taken several new research initiatives, besides initiatives to 
promote energy conservation and environment preservation in line with its 
corporate social responsibility (Box X.2). 
 9 
 
The Reserve Bank’s Accounts for 2011-12 (July-June)
• The balance sheet of the Reserve Bank expanded significantly by about       
`4 trillion or 22 per cent during the accounting year. A little over half of the 
increase was on account of open market purchases of government securities 
(domestic assets). The increase in foreign assets was mainly due to valuation 
effect arising from depreciation of the Indian rupee against the US dollar that 
more than offset the decline in net stock of foreign currency assets due to 
dollar sales during the year (para XI.5-XI.6).  
• In 2011-12, the Reserve Bank’s gross income increased by 43.4 per cent. The 
income from foreign assets declined for the third successive year, reflecting 
the low interest rates prevalent in international markets. The decline in income 
from foreign assets was more than offset by an increase in earnings from 
domestic assets (para XI.4).  
• The transfer of surplus profit to the central government amounted to `160.10 
billion compared to `150.09 billion in the previous year (para XI.11).  
 
 
 
      Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2012-2013/318                                   Chief General Manager 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 