1 
 
 
? ? ? ?? ?  PRESS RELEASE 
 
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ??? ? ? ? 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA  
? ?? ? ? ? ?? ? ?,  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ??? , ??. ??. ??. ?? ? , ? ? ?-400001 
? ?? ? ? ? ? : www.rbi.org.in/hindi 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Website : www.rbi.org.in 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION, Central Office, S.B.S.Marg, Mumbai-400001 
? ??/Phone: 91 22 2266 0502  ? ?? ?/Fax: 91 22 22660358 ?- ? ?? email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in 
 
October 30, 2012 
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13 
Press Statement by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India  
"First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank, I want to welcome you all to this 
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2012-13. 
2. A short while ago, we put out the Second Quarter Review. Based on an 
assessment of the current macroeconomic situation, we have decided to:  
? Cut the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks by 25 basis points from 
4.5 per cent to 4.25 per cent of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) 
effective the fortnight beginning November 3, 2012. 
? The reduction in the CRR, will inject around `175 billion of primary liquidity into 
the banking system. 
3.  There is no change in policy interest rate. Accordingly, the repo rate under the 
liquidity adjustment facility remains at 8.0 per cent.  
4. Consequently, the reverse repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), 
determined with a spread of 100 basis points below the repo rate, will continue at 7.0 per 
cent, and the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate, determined with a spread of 
100 bps above the repo rate, at 9.0 per cent. 
Considerations Behind the Policy Move 
5. Let me begin with an explanation of the rationale behind this monetary policy 
action.  
6. The decision to cut the CRR and keep the policy interest rate unchanged draws 
from our assessment of the evolving liquidity situation and the growth-inflation 
dynamic.   
? First on liquidity. Systemic liquidity deficit has been high because of several 
factors: the wedge between deposit and credit growth, the build-up of 
Government’s cash balances from mid-September and the drainage of liquidity 
on account of festival-related step-up in currency demand. This high systemic 
deficit will have adverse implications for the flow of credit to productive sectors 
and for the overall growth of the economy going forward.  
 
????? ??????????????2 
 
? As regards the growth-inflation balance, headline WPI inflation moderated from 
its peak of 10.9 per cent in April 2010 to an average rate of 7.5 per cent over 
the period January-August 2012. During this time, growth has slowed and is 
currently below trend. This slowdown is due to a host of factors, including 
monetary tightening.  
? Since April 2012, the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy stance has sought to 
balance the growth–inflation dynamic through calibrated easing. The 
transmission of these policy impulses through the economy is still underway. In 
conjunction with the fiscal and other measures recently announced by the 
Government, the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy stance should work towards 
arresting the loss of growth momentum over the next few months. Yesterday’s 
statement by the Finance Minister reaffirming commitment to fiscal 
consolidation will open up space for monetary policy to restrain inflation and 
support growth.  
? Now coming to inflation. It turned up again in September, reflecting the partial 
pass-through of adjustment of diesel and electricity prices, and elevated 
inflation in non-food manufactured products. It is, therefore, critical that even as 
the monetary policy stance shifts further towards addressing growth risks, the 
objective of containing inflation and anchoring inflation expectations is not de-
emphasised.   
Monetary Policy Stance 
7. The policy document spells out the three broad contours of our  monetary 
policy stance. These are: 
? first, to manage liquidity to ensure adequate flow of credit to the productive 
sectors of the economy;  
? second, to reinforce the positive impact of government policy actions on growth 
as inflation risks moderate; and  
? third, to maintain an interest rate environment to contain inflation and anchor 
inflation expectations. 
Guidance 
8. As in the past, we have also given guidance for the period forward.  
9. In reducing CRR, the Reserve Bank intended to pre-empt a prospective 
tightening of liquidity conditions, thereby keeping liquidity comfortable and supportive 
of growth. The policy stance anticipates the projected inflation trajectory which 
indicates a rise in inflation over the next few months before easing in the last quarter. 
While there are risks to this trajectory, the baseline scenario suggests a reasonable 
likelihood of further policy easing in the fourth quarter of this fiscal year. Let me add 
though that this guidance will, however, be conditioned by the evolving growth-inflation 
dynamic.   
Expected Outcomes 
10. We expect that today’s policy actions, and the guidance that we have given, will 
result in the following three outcomes: 3 
 
? first, liquidity conditions will facilitate a turnaround in credit growth to productive 
sectors so as to support growth;  
? second, as inflation risks moderate, the growth stimulus of the policy actions 
announced by the Government will be reinforced;  
? and, finally, the policy action will anchor medium-term inflation expectations on 
the basis of a credible commitment to low and stable inflation. 
Global and Domestic Developments 
11. As always, our policy action has been based on a careful assessment of the 
global and domestic macroeconomic situation. Let me comment first on the global 
economy.  
Global Economy  
12. Over the last quarter, policymakers around the world have confronted 
increasingly difficult challenges. Globally, even as the growth momentum has slowed, 
governments have had to manage the balance between fiscal consolidation and 
growth stimulus amidst visible signs that the two objectives are in conflict with each 
other. As the advanced economies deal with these tensions and global demand 
conditions weaken, emerging and developing economies are also slowing down. 
13. Liquidity infusions by central banks in advanced economies  during the quarter 
have contributed to some stability in global financial markets. It is important to note 
though that liquidity infusions are only a   stop-gap measure intended to maintain 
financial stability and arrest further downturn. They cannot substitute for robust 
structural solutions that can return the advanced economies to the path of recovery. At 
this stage, growth risks have risen and could well overwhelm the positive effects of 
enhanced liquidity. Moreover, notwithstanding some muted softening recently, 
commodity prices are still at elevated levels. Consequently, there is a significant risk of 
liquidity-driven price increases. Even as the global recovery process moves forward, 
the months ahead will be a period of heightened uncertainty for the global economy. 
Indian Economy 
14. Let me now turn to the domestic macroeconomic situation. Growth decelerated 
over four successive quarters, from 9.2 per cent year-on-year in the fourth quarter of 
2010-11 to 5.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011-12. In the first quarter of this year, 
growth was marginally higher at 5.5 per cent. This slight improvement in GDP growth 
in the first quarter was mainly driven by growth in construction, and supported by 
better than expected growth in agriculture. On the demand side, the growth of gross 
fixed capital formation decelerated, while the slowdown in growth of private 
consumption expenditure continued. The external demand conditions and crude oil 
prices also remained unfavourable, adversely impacting net exports. 
15. Over the last quarter, global risks have increased and domestic risks have 
become accentuated owing to halted investment demand, moderation in consumption 
spending and continuing erosion in export competitiveness accompanied by 
weakening business and consumer confidence. The industrial outlook remains 
uncertain. Notwithstanding the improvement in rainfall in the months of August and 
September, the first advance estimates of the 2012 kharif production are about 10 per 
cent lower than last year’s production.  4 
 
16. On the basis of the above considerations, the baseline projection of GDP 
growth for 2012-13 is revised downwards from 6.5 per cent to 5.8 per cent.  
Inflation 
17. Moving on to inflation. Headline WPI inflation remained sticky, at above 7.5 per 
cent on a y-o-y basis, through the first half of the current year. Furthermore, in 
September there was a pick-up in the momentum of headline inflation owing to the 
increase in fuel prices and elevated price levels of non-food manufactured products. 
This is, in part, attributable to some suppressed inflation in the form of earlier under-
pricing being corrected. However, even after adjusting for this, the momentum remains 
firm.   
18. While WPI primary food articles moderated since July due to the softening of 
prices of vegetables, prices of cereal and protein items edged up. WPI food products 
inflation increased in September, mainly due to the firming up of the prices of sugar, 
edible oils and grain mill products.  
19. Fuel group inflation registered a significant rise in September, reflecting the 
sharp increase in prices of electricity effected from June, the partial impact of the 
increase in prices of diesel in mid-September and significant increase in non-
administered fuel prices on account of rising global crude prices. 
20. Non-food manufactured products inflation was persistent at 5.6 per cent 
through July-September. This upside pressure was a result of firm prices of metal 
products and other inputs and intermediates, especially goods with high import 
content due to a depreciating rupee.   
21. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the new CPI, remained elevated, 
reflecting the build-up of food price pressures. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel 
groups ebbed slightly during June-September, from double digits earlier.  
22. Looking ahead, the path of inflation will be shaped by two sets of counteracting 
forces.  
? First, on the downside, slower growth and excess capacity in some sectors will 
help moderate core inflation. Stable, or in the best case scenario, declining 
commodity prices will reinforce this tendency. An appreciating rupee will also 
help to contain inflationary pressures by bringing down the rupee cost of 
imports, especially of commodities.   
? Balancing those downside forces are some on the upside. Persistent supply 
constraints may aggravate as demand revives, resulting in price pressures. 
Global financial instability could put downward pressure on the rupee and that 
will add to imported inflation. Also, the upsurge in both rural and urban wages 
will exert cost-push pressures on inflation.  
? Finally, as under-pricing in several products is corrected as part of the fiscal 
consolidation process, suppressed inflation is being brought into the open. This 
correction is necessary and important. Nevertheless, it will result in higher 
inflation readings. 
 5 
 
23. Taking the above factors into consideration, the baseline projection for headline 
WPI inflation for March 2013 is raised to 7.5 per cent from 7.0 per cent indicated in 
July. Importantly, inflation is expected to rise somewhat in the third quarter before 
beginning to ease in the fourth quarter. 
Monetary and Liquidity Conditions  
24. Let me now move on to monetary and liquidity conditions. Money supply (M ), 
3
deposit and credit growth have so far trailed below the indicative trajectories of the 
Reserve Bank indicated in the April Policy and reiterated in the July Review. Deposit 
growth has decelerated with the moderation in interest rates, especially term deposits. 
Credit growth has ebbed with the slowdown in investment demand, especially with 
regard to infrastructure, and lower absorption of credit by industry, in general. Keeping 
in view the developments during the year so far and the usual year-end pick-up, the 
trajectories of the monetary aggregates for 2012-13 are projected at 14 per cent for 
M , 15 per cent for deposit growth and 16 per cent for growth of non-food credit.  
3
25. Liquidity conditions, as reflected in the average net borrowing under the LAF at 
`486 billion during July-September, remained within the comfort zone of (+/-) one per 
cent of NDTL. However, liquidity conditions tightened in October, mainly on account of 
the build-up in the Government’s cash balances and the seasonal increase in currency 
demand, taking the average LAF borrowing to `871 billion during October 15-25, well 
above the band of (+/-) one per cent of NDTL 
Risk Factors 
26. Now, let me highlight the risks to our growth and inflation projections:  
? First, the downside risks to growth stemming from the global macroeconomic 
environment now seem likely to be stronger than earlier thought. Domestically, 
a revival in investment activity, which is key to stimulating growth, depends 
particularly on the recent policy announcements by the Government being  
translated into effective actions;  
? Second, despite recent moderation, global commodity prices remain high. Also, 
under recoveries in domestic prices of administered petroleum products persist 
and will need to be corrected. While corrections are welcome from the 
viewpoint of overall macroeconomic stability, we will have to guard against their 
second-round effects on inflation.   
? Third, the behaviour of food inflation will depend on the supply response in 
respect of commodities characterised by structural imbalances, particularly 
protein items;  
? Fourth, the persistent increase in rural and urban wages, unaccompanied by 
commensurate productivity increase, has been and will continue to be a source 
of inflationary pressures; 
? Fifth, the large twin deficits, i.e., the current account deficit and the fiscal deficit 
pose significant risks to both growth and macroeconomic stability; and 
? Finally, while liquidity pressures pose risks to credit availability for productive 
purposes and could adversely affect overall investment, excess liquidity could 
aggravate inflation risks. 6 
 
Developmental and Regulatory Policies 
27. This review also includes developmental and regulatory policies which focus on 
carrying forward the initiatives taken for strengthening the financial system and for 
efficiently providing financial services to the widest sections of society.  Let me briefly 
indicate some of the important initiatives in this regard.  
28. I will begin with financial markets and market infrastructure. Some important 
measures contained in the policy are the following: 
? The settlement cycle of the primary auction in Treasury Bills   (T-Bills) will be 
reduced from T+2 to T+1. 
? IRS contracts will be standardised to facilitate centralised clearing and 
settlement of these contracts. 
? We will move towards developing a trade repository for OTC derivatives. 
29. Now let me move on to initiatives for financial inclusion, credit delivery and 
customer service.  Drawing on extensive consultation with banks, we have rationalised 
the guidelines on priority sector lending.   Important initiatives in this regard are the 
following: 
? Loans up to `20 million to partnership firms, cooperatives and corporates 
directly engaged in agriculture and allied activities under partnership, rural co-
operative and corporate categories will also be classified as direct finance to 
agriculture. 
? Bank loans to Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) for on-lending for housing 
up to `1 million per borrower will be included under the priority sector, provided 
the interest rate charged to the ultimate borrower by the HFC does not exceed 
two percentage points above the lowest interest rate of the lending bank for 
housing loans. 
30. As regards the cooperative sector, scheduled urban cooperative banks (UCBs) 
have been allowed to undertake repo transactions in corporate bonds.  
31. Another important step relates to micro and small enterprises.  The definition of 
sickness of these enterprises is modified to facilitate early rehabilitation of potentially 
viable sick units and to lay down a procedure for assessing viability of sick units in the 
sector. 
32. Moving on to regulation and supervision, we are carrying forward the 
implementation of Basel III capital regulations by issuing draft guidelines on capital 
requirements for bank exposures to central counterparties by mid-November 2012 and 
on composition of capital disclosure requirements by end-December 2012.  
33. Given the larger objectives of financial stability, and keeping in view 
international best practices to ensure that banks have sufficient provisioning buffer, 
the provision for restructured standard accounts is being raised from the existing 2 per 
cent to 2.75 per cent. 
34. To address the issue of rise in NPAs and restructured advances of banks, and 
with a view to improving effective information sharing among banks on credit, 
derivatives and unhedged foreign currency exposures, banks are being advised to put 7 
 
in place, by end-December 2012, an effective mechanism for information sharing. Any 
sanction of fresh loans/ad-hoc loans/renewal of loans to new or existing borrowers 
with effect from January 1, 2013 should be made only after obtaining/sharing 
necessary information. 
35. Turning to unhedged foreign currency exposures of corporates, which is a 
source of risk to them as well as to the financing banks and the financial system, we 
are advising banks to put in place a proper mechanism to rigorously evaluate the risks 
arising out of unhedged foreign currency exposures of corporates, and price them in 
the credit risk premium. Banks are also being advised to consider stipulating a limit on 
the unhedged position of corporates on the basis of bank’s Board-approved policy. 
36. We are in the process of strengthening the regulatory framework for dealing 
with Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs) which may come under stress 
and may require resolution.  Accordingly, the Government and the Reserve Bank are 
setting up a High Level Working Group to recommend a comprehensive resolution 
regime for all types of financial institutions in India. 
37. Before I close, let me note that the persistence of inflation pressures, even as 
growth has moderated, remains a key challenge. Of particular concern is the 
stickiness of core inflation, mainly on account of supply constraints and the cost-push 
of rupee depreciation. Consequently, managing inflation and inflation expectations 
must remain the primary focus of monetary policy. A central premise of monetary 
policy is that low and stable inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations 
contribute to a conducive investment climate and consumer confidence, which is key 
to sustained growth on a higher trajectory in the medium-term.  
38. Accordingly, over the past few quarters, monetary policy had to focus on 
inflation, even as growth risks have increased.  As recent policy initiatives by the 
Government start yielding results in terms of revitalising activity, they will open up 
space for monetary policy to work in concert to stimulate growth. However, in doing 
so, it is important not to lose sight of the primary objective of managing inflation and 
inflation expectations.  
39. Thank you for your attention. On behalf of the Reserve Bank, my best wishes to 
everyone for a Happy Diwali. 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Press Release : 2012-2013/713                          Chief General Manager 
         