PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
RBI  on Internet: http://www.rbi.org.in
http://www.rbi.org.in\hindi
       e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
July 16, 2004
Finance Minister meets the Directors of the RBI Central Board
The customary post-budget meeting of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank
of India with the Finance Minister was held at New Delhi today. The meeting
was also attended by Dr. Ashok Lahiri, Chief Economic Adviser, Smt. Vineeta
Rai, Secretary, Revenue, Shri N.S. Sisodia, Secretary, Financial Sector, Shri
D. Swarup, Secretary, Expenditure & Budget.
Besides Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank, Shri D.C. Gupta,
Finance Secretary, Dr. Rakesh Mohan and Smt. K.J. Udeshi, Deputy
Governors of the Reserve Bank and other Directors of the Central Board of
the Reserve Bank of India present at the meeting included Dr. A.S. Ganguly,
Chairman, ICICI OneSource Ltd., Shri Y. H. Malegam, Chartered Accountant,
Dr. Amrita Patel, Chairman, National Dairy Development Board, Prof. Mihir
Rakshit, Director, Monetary Research Project, ICRA, Shri H. P. Ranina,
Advocate, Supreme Court of India, Shri K. Madhava Rao, State Election
Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh, Prof. C.N.R. Rao, Honorary President,
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Shri K. P. Singh,
Chairman, DLF Group, Shri Ratan N. Tata, Chairman, Tata Sons Ltd. and
Prof. V. S. Vyas, Former Director, IIM, Ahmedabad.
Welcoming the Honourable Finance Minister and the Secretaries of the
Ministry of Finance, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, said that this year the budget
has laid out the broad vision of the Government’s economic strategy focusing
on growth and equity. He noted the great stress laid in the budget on fiscal
consolidation and the Finance Minister’s strong commitment to adhering to
the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act. This will
contribute to the growing strength of the Indian economy. The priority given to
agriculture is essential for accelerating overall growth of the economy as it is
equally for ensuring the welfare of the 60 percent of the country’s population
dependent on agriculture.
In his address to the RBI Board the Finance Minister explained that the
Budget reflected the complex mandate given by the people to the new
government. This Budget has reflected the government’s broad understanding
that the agricultural sector and rural India must be given much greater
attention in the reform process to accelerate growth, and to address emerging
equity concerns. The Finance Minister said that the budget has looked
seriously into problems relating to drinking water, education, basic health
care, roads and employment in the rural areas and proposed several
schemes to bring about improvements in these areas.The Finance Minister explained that while the Budget can provide funds, there
is great need to strengthen the delivery system.  He emphasised that
investment is the key to both agricultural and industrial growth. In this context,
he pointed out that both public and private investment in agricultural has been
falling in recent years and emphasised the necessity of correcting this trend.
He hoped that the tax break given to agro business will promote greater
activity in this area. In particular, he mentioned the launch of the National
Horticultural Mission.
The Finance Minister emphasised his commitment to fiscal consolidation
through notification of the Fiscal Responsibility & Budget Management
(FRBM) Act.  As the government makes progress in achieving the objectives
spelt out in the FRBM Act, more headroom will become available for making
public investment in infrastructure.
The Directors of the RBI Board complimented the Finance Minister for a
balanced and reform-oriented Budget.  Welcoming the various initiatives, the
Directors particularly appreciated the measures taken towards encouraging
both rural and industrial investment. Emphasizing the importance of
accelerating industrial growth in the country, the Directors felt that this would
be difficult to achieve unless investment in infrastructure was stepped up, both
in public and private sector.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/67