`
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS
RELEASE
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿?¸ƒÄ 400 001
RESERVE BANK OF
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279
INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 30, 2004
India to follow consultative process while moving towards BASEL II:
RBI Deputy Governor
The Reserve Bank of India would follow a consultative process while implementing Basle II
norms for capital adequacy of banks and move in a gradual, sequential and co-ordinated manner.
Towards this end, the Reserve Bank will set up a Steering Committee which in turn would have a
smaller focused sub-committees for each of the three pillars of Basle II with members representing
interests of all stake holders. This was stated by Smt. K.J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank
of India in a Seminar on Capital Adequacy Framework under Basle II held here today. The Reserve
Bank of India has organised the two-day Seminar for Chief Executive Officers and other senior
officials of major banks mainly to sensitise the Chief Executive Officers and the Boards of banks
towards the opportunities and challenges emerging out of the Basle II norms.
Highlighting the opportunities and challenges of the new norms, the Deputy Governor said
that the main benefit of Basle II will flow from the greater awareness of risk that it will instill in the
banks. It also has in-built incentives for improved risk analysis, risk management systems,
allocation of capital and pricing of risk, she added. Achieving sophistication in their risk
management capabilities might enable banks to improve the quality of their asset portfolio, she
pointed out. Importantly, Basel II permits banks a choice between Standardised Approach and
Internal Ratings Based Approach towards measurement of capital requirements for credit risk.
Explaining this, she said that in Standardised Approach, banks have to measure credit risk as
prescribed by the regulator and as supported by external assessments. Internal Ratings Based
Approach differs substantially from the Standardised Approach to the extent that banks’ internal
assessments of key risk parameters serve as primary inputs to capital calculation.
Smt. Udeshi also stated that the path, pace and processes for moving towards Basle II
norms will depend on consultations and feedback received from the banks. It will, however, be
necessary for each bank to take the Reserve Bank's approval before exercising its option for
moving to advance Internal ratings Based Approach. According to the Deputy Governor, the
process of consultation, testing, parallel runs and acquiring regulatory approval may take more than
a year.
The Deputy Governor stated that as Indian banking system moved towards international
best practices, moving to Basle II was seen as consistent with India's approach to financial
integration with the rest of the world. The Deputy Governor further explained that options under
Basle II were not static and banks could move in a continuum from the Standardised Approach to
advanced Internal Ratings Based Approach. She pointed out that the norms would compel a bank
to first assess its own risk management capability, its technical expertise, its data warehousing and
data mining readiness as also capacity to incur expenditure on advanced technology.  The new
norms require a lot of disclosures of risks and the risk management practices by banks. Data
sharing among banks is also a very crucial under the new norms. Stating that the Basle II model is
highly dependent on a sound financial infrastructure, the Deputy Governor pointed out that to limit
the risks to financial stability, implementation of Basle II would need to be complemented with
several other initiatives. The Deputy Governor mentioned that the Reserve Bank’s initiative in
issuing the February and June 2004 guidelines to evaluate the fit and proper criteria for
shareholders and directors and the draft guidelines on ownership and governance in private banks
need to be viewed from this perspective.
It may be recalled that the Bank for International Settlement released the revised framework
for capital measurement and capital standards in June 2004. The revised framework provides2
revised methodology along with options for banks and banking systems for determining the capital
requirements for credit risk and operational risk. The revised framework also enables
banks/supervisors to select approaches that are most appropriate for their operations and financial
markets. The framework is expected to promote adoption of stronger risk management practices in
banks.
The Basel II framework envisages a three-pillar approach. Pillar I prescribes the minimum
capital requirement. Pillar II comprises supervisory review that not only ensures that banks have
adequate capital to support all the risks in their business, but also encourages banks to develop and
use better risk management techniques in monitoring and managing their risks. Pillar III
complements Pillar I and II in encouraging market discipline by developing a set of disclosure
requirements that allow market participants to assess key information on the scope of application,
capital, risk exposures, risk assessment process and hence the capital adequacy of a bank.
Since the Standardised Approach is based on banks’ internal assessments, the potential for
more risk sensitive capital requirements is substantial. In India, until the financial year ended March
2004, banks were required to maintain capital for credit risk in the lines of Basel I. These banks
were also required to maintain capital charge for market risks by way of additional risk weights for
their investment portfolio, open gold and forex positions and investment fluctuation reserve.  With
effect from the current financial year, banks in India will be maintaining capital for credit risk and
market risks on the lines of Basel I. Thus capital charge for operational risk will be a new feature
under Basel II.
The Seminar, over two days, will discuss the various concepts of the Basel II framework
and their implications on the banks in India.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/122