` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
July 14, 2004
Basic Statistical Returns of Scheduled Commercial
Banks in India - Volume-32, March 2003
The Basic Statistical Returns of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India-Volume 32,
March 2003 is available for sale. The Department of Statistical Analysis and Computer
Services of Reserve Bank of India brings out this publication annually. The Volume, thirty-
second in the series, presents comprehensive data on Number of Offices, Employees,
Deposits and Credit based on Basic Statistical Returns in respect of the offices of the
scheduled commercial banks in India as at end-March 2003. The Volume is divided into five
different Sections disseminating credit and deposit data of scheduled commercial banks with
reference to various classificatory characteristics. Section 1 presents general information on
commercial banking as also the summary data on deposits and credit at all-India and State
level. Section 2 gives State/District-wise distribution of deposits and outstanding credit
classified according to population groups and bank groups. Data on deposits by type of
deposits is presented in Section 3. Classification of outstanding credit according to different
categories such as size of credit limit, rate of interest, type of organisation, type of account,
bank group, State and population group, etc. are given in Section 4. In Section 5, these are
further classified according to occupation of borrower. District and occupation-wise
distribution of outstanding credit is also given in the final section.
The publication is also available separately on CD-ROM. Index/search allows easy
navigation. The tables are in MS Excel formats, which are easy to download/copy.
The publication is priced as below:
Inland:  i) Rs. 210/-  (Normal)
             ii) Rs 250/- (Inclusive of Postage)
Abroad: i) US $ 55 (Inclusive of Courier Charges)
             ii) US $ 70 (Inclusive of Registered Airmail Charges).
The copies of publication/CD are available in the Sales Section (DRRP), Amar
Building (Ground floor), P. M. Road, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Economic
Analysis and Policy, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001. Order for purchase can be placed with the
Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic Analysis
nd
and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, City Ice Building, 2 Floor, Perin Nariman Street, Fort,
Mumbai-400 001 on payment through D.D/Cheque/Pay Order drawn in favour of Reserve
Bank of India, payable at Mumbai only. The publication is also available at the Reserve
Bank's Website on the Internet at URL: www.rbi.org.in
P. V. Sadanandan
           Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/54