PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 16, 2004
RTGS Services now for Bank Customers: RBI
The Reserve Bank of India has, today announced that its Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS) System has been enabled for ‘Straight Through
Processing’ at the participant’s, that is, the bank’s end for putting through
customer transactions. Straight through processing of customer transactions
will, upon receiving the credit advice, allow banks to directly credit the
customer’s account without any manual intervention. This will facilitate
introduction of T+1 settlement in respect of the Stock Exchanges. Thirty-two
out of the 72 banks, that are participants in RTGS system, offer customer
related RTGS fund transfer services through 840 branches in 134 major
centers across the country, accounting for bulk of banking business in the
country.
The Reserve Bank has also stated that the receiving bank is under an
obligation to credit the beneficiary customer’s account within two hours of
receiving the credit notification at its payment systems gateway. The list of
bank branches, offering RTGS services to their customers as on date, is
available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in) under the RTGS link for the
benefit of bank customers.
It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank of India’s Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) System went live on March 26, 2004. Initially, it was open
to the settlement of inter-bank transactions. From April 29, 2004, the RTGS
System has been open also for the settlement of customer transactions.
RTGS is a ‘Systemically Important Payment System’ and covers the banking
and financial sector in the country. It is a secure electronic fund transfer
system, providing real-time on-line settlement for inter-bank transactions and
customer-based inter-bank transactions of any amount across the country. All
the scheduled banks in the country can be RTGS participants and provide this
electronic fund transfer facility to their customers. Currently, there are 72
banks participating in the RTGS System for inter-bank settlement, accounting
for more than 90 per cent of the total value of inter-bank settlement in
Mumbai.
Alpana Killawala
     Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/188