Easing Individual Foreign Exchange Transactions:
RBI implements Tarapore Committee recommendations
The Reserve Bank of India has initiated a variety of measures to ensure that
individuals’ transactions in foreign exchange are as easy as their transactions in rupees. The
measures include introduction of a liberalised scheme of personal remittance upto US$
25,000 in February 2004 and removal of the restrictive clause of issuing Employees’ Stock
Option at concessional rates. The Reserve Bank has also changed the name of the
department handling the implementation of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 from
Exchange Control Department to Foreign Exchange Department and has reoriented it as a
lean strategic task force. Further, the Reserve Bank has advised banks to initiate measures to
position trained staff at the first point of interface with customers in their authorised dealer
branches.
It may be recalled that as a follow-up of the Mid-Term Review Monetary and Credit
Policy undertaken in November 2003, the Reserve Bank of India had set up a Committee on
Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore, former
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India). The Tarapore Committee examined the Reserve
Bank's procedures and performance under four different areas affecting individual customer
transactions. These were foreign exchange, Government transactions, banking operations
and currency management. The Tarapore Committee submitted its reports between January
and April 2004. The Reserve Bank has examined the recommendations of the Tarapore
Committee and has initiated steps for their implementation in each area. The action taken by
the Reserve Bank in each area is being released separately.
The Reserve Bank of India has also forwarded the recommendations of the Tarapore
Committee to banks for follow-up action through their internal Ad hoc Committees on
Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services. The Reserve Bank of India has urged
the Ad hoc Committees to initiate necessary steps for simplification of procedures and
practice in these areas especially for transactions of individuals. It has also advised the bank
level Ad hoc Committees to ensure the presence of trained and knowledgeable staff at the
first point of interface with customers.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release no. 2003-2004/1377