PRESS RELEASE 
9 
 
 
 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post 
RESERVE BANK 
Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
OF INDIA  
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
RBI On Internet: 
 
http://www.rbi.org.in 
Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
 
February 4, 2004 
 
Liberalised Remittance Scheme of USD 25,000  
for Resident Individuals 
 
As a part of the measures for further liberalization, residents would be permitted 
to remit an amount up to USD 25,000 per calendar year for any purpose without any 
distinction between the transaction being on the current account or capital account, for 
which a Scheme has been formulated by the Reserve Bank. 
 
All resident individuals are eligible to avail of the facility under the scheme. This 
facility is available for making remittance up to USD 25,000 per calendar year for any 
current or capital account transaction or a combination of both. Under this facility, 
resident individuals will be free to acquire and hold immovable property or shares or any 
other asset outside India without prior approval of the Reserve Bank. Individuals will 
also be able to open, maintain and hold foreign currency accounts with a bank outside 
India for making remittances under the scheme without prior approval of Reserve Bank. 
The foreign currency account may be used for putting through all transactions 
connected with or arising from remittances eligible under this Scheme. 
 
The facility under the Scheme is in addition to those already available for private 
travel, business travel, gift remittances, donations, studies, medical treatment etc. 
However remittance under this facility cannot be used for remittances for any current 
account transaction specifically prohibited or restricted under FEMA such as purchase 
of lottery/sweep stakes, proscribed magazines etc. Remittances cannot be made 
directly or indirectly under this scheme to Bhutan, Nepal, Mauritius or Pakistan as well 
as to countries identified by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as “non co-
operative countries and territories,  or to those high risk individuals and entities advised 
separately by the Reserve Bank to the banks. 
 
Applicants should furnish their PAN Number and confirm to the Authorised 
Dealer (AD) bank, that the funds being remitted belong to them. ADs are expected to 
carry out due diligence including Know Your Customer (KYC) norms and comply with 
Anti Money Laundering rules while allowing this facility. 
 
The Scheme will come into operation with immediate effect. 
 
Ajit Prasad 
Manager 
 
Press Release: 2003-2004/942 
 