PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
May 29, 2004
Tarapore Committee commends efforts on Currency
Management: Suggests measures for further improvement
The Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services
(CPPAPS or the Tarapore Committee) has recently examined the important issues
relating to Currency Management, particularly, the interface of the `Common Person'
with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the commercial banks. The Committee has
noted with satisfaction that the concerted efforts by the RBI and the Government of India
(GoI) have largely alleviated the chronic shortages of bank notes and coins and to that
extent the severe hardships faced by the common person have been eased. The
measures relating to the Clean Note Policy and the currency verification, processing and
sorting systems have also provided succour to the common person seeking facilities at
the RBI or commercial banks. The Committee has also observed that not only efforts
should continue so that the "inconveniences" experienced by the public in the matters
relating to bank notes and coins are removed, considering the statutory role of the RBI
and the changes in public demand, the RBI and the banks should put in place a pro-
active mechanism for currency management. The RBI has placed on date the Action
Taken Report on Currency Management on its website today.
The Committee has observed that the RBI should take appropriate action to
remove the “inconveniences” experienced by the public in using banks for obtaining their
requirement of notes and coins including exchange of soiled and mutilated notes, as
also uncurrent and current coins. It should also take steps for early introduction of Rs. 10
coins, immediate end to parallel supply of bank notes and coins of the same
denomination, eliminating shortages in incipient stages so that they do not snowball,
consider paying incentive to banks for acceptance of return of uncurrent coins, publish
public friendly material on issues relating to currency management that concern the
common man, such as, Note Refund Rules and Citizens' Charter and making them
easily available at bank counters/halls. The Committee has also recommended that the
RBI should review its instructions and where the instructions are retained, violation
should invite adverse action and such action should be put in public domain.  The
Committee has also recommended that the currency chest agreements should be
revised so as to include in them a provision for a monetary penalty for non-compliance of
the extant directions and guidelines.
The RBI has already forwarded the recommendations of the Tarapore Committee
to the concerned banks for follow-up action through their internal Ad-hoc Committees on
Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services. The RBI has urged the Ad-hoc
Committees to initiate necessary steps for simplification of procedures and practice in
these areas especially for transactions with the individual members of public.                 Alpana Killawala
Press Release: 2003-2004/1400      Chief General Manager