` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 21, 2004
Two New Deputy Governors at RBI
Shri Vittaldas Leeladhar and Smt. Shyamala Gopinath have today
taken over charge as Deputy Governors at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Government of India notified the appointments by its notifications dated
September 20, 2004.
According to the Government notifications, Shri Leeladhar will hold
charge as Deputy Governor till attaining the age of 62 years, that is, till
December 2008 and Smt. Gopinath will hold charge for a period of five years
or till she attains the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier.
Shri Leeladhar will oversee Department of Information Technology,
Department of Administration and Personnel Management, Human
Resources Development Department, Premises Department, Rural Planning
& Credit Department and Urban Banks Department.
Smt. Gopinath will oversee Department of Government and Bank
Accounts, Department of Expenditure and Budgetary Control, Department of
Non-Banking Supervision, Foreign Exchange Department, Legal Department
and Central Security Cell.
Shri Vittaldas Leeladhar
Born on December 7, 1946, Shri Leeladhar holds a first class
bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from Kerala University. He is also
a fellow of Indian Institute of Bankers, Mumbai. Shri Leeladhar has had a long
and distinguished career in banking. Joining Syndicate Bank as a trainee
officer in 1969, Shri Leeladhar moved over to Corporation Bank in 1980 and
rose to the post of the General Manager. He was appointed as Executive
Director of Bank of Maharashtra in 1996 and in 1997 was appointed Chairman
and Managing Director, Vijaya Bank. He took over as the Chairman and
Managing Director of Union Bank of India in the year 2000. He was also
Chairman, Indian Banks’ Association. As a banker, Shri Leeladhar has
overseen a variety of portfolios including credit, international banking,
investments, merchant banking and personal banking.
Shri Leeladhar was a member of the Governing Councils of the Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance, Institute of Banking Personnel Selection,
Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology and the
National Foundation for Corporate Governance.Smt. Shyamala Gopinath 
Born on June 20, 1949, Smt. S. Gopinath holds a Master’s degree in
Commerce and is a Certificated Associate of the Indian Institute of Bankers.
Joining the Reserve Bank of India as a direct recruit officer on probation in
April 1972, Smt. Gopinath was the senior most Executive Director in the
Reserve Bank of India (appointed in June 2003) prior to her elevation as the
Deputy Governor. Smt. Gopinath has handled some of the critical portfolios in
the Reserve Bank, such as, financial markets, including regulation and
management of government debt and exchange rate, management of foreign
exchange reserves, and banking regulation and supervision.
During her two-year deputation to the International Monetary Fund,
between 2001 and 2003, Smt. Gopinath has dealt with foreign exchange
reserves management, safeguard assessment and foreign exchange markets.
She has been part of IMF missions of Financial Sector Assessment
Programmes to Hungary, Poland, Nigeria and Tanzania. Smt. Gopinath has
been a part of the World Trade Organisation’s deliberations relating to
financial services. She has also been a delegate on the Asian Clearing Union
and Bank for International Settlements.
Apart from heading the Financial Markets Committee of the Reserve
Bank, Smt. Gopinath is the Chairperson of the Standing Advisory Committee
on gold and precious metals and was the Convenor and member of the
Working Group on Financial Conglomerates. Smt. Gopinath has also assisted
the Second Narasimhan Committee on Banking Sector Reforms. She has
been on the boards of Union Bank of India (1998-2001) and Bank of
Maharashtra (1994-1996).
Photographs of both the Deputy Governors can be downloaded from
the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in)
                                                                                 Alpana Killawala
                                                                          Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/323