 
 
 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post 
RESERVE BANK 
Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
OF INDIA  
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
RBI On Internet: 
 
http://www.rbi.org.in 
Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
February 10, 2004 
 
RBI constitutes Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI Sector; 
Invites suggestions 
 
A Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI sector has been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Dr. A. S. Ganguly, Director, Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Other members of the Working Group are:  
 
1. Padmashri Jaya Arunachalam, Working Women's  Forum, Chennai. 
2. Shri Kailash P.Jhunjhunwala, Director, State Bank of India Board.        
3. Dr. Ashok Jhunjhunwala, Electrical Engineering Department, Indian 
    Institute of Technology, Chennai.                        
4. Shri A.K.Purwar, Chairman, State Bank of India.                       
5. Shri N.Vaghul, Chairman, ICICI Bank Ltd.                                      
6. Shri S.S.Kohli, CMD, Punjab National Bank.   
 
The terms of reference of the Group are: 
 
1. To assess the progress made in implementation of Kapur Committee and Gupta 
Committee’s recommendations. 
2. To suggest ways to improve credit flow to the SSI sector, particularly tiny sector 
and examine the issues of linkages with large corporates/producers. 
3. Evaluation of methods of utilisation of deposits made by foreign banks with Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for shortfall in their priority sector 
obligations. 
4. To suggest appropriate institutional arrangement for enhancing the credit delivery 
to the sector on a timely basis and in adequate measures. 
5. Further plans to extend micro finance coverage. 
 
Comments and suggestions, if any, relating to the issues covered in the terms of 
reference of the Committee may please be forwarded to the Chief General Manager-
in-Charge, Reserve Bank of India, Rural Planning and Credit Department, Central 
Office, Mumbai - 400 001, so as to reach him latest by March 1, 2004. 
 
   The Reserve Bank of India had earlier constituted an Advisory Committee on 
Flow of Credit to Agriculture and related activities from the banking system under the 
chairmanship of noted economist Prof. V.S. Vyas. The Advisory Committee, which is 
required to submit its report by April 2004, had also invited comments and suggestions 
relating to the issues being looked into by it by February 20, 2004.   
   Both, the Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit to Agriculture and related 
activities from the banking system and the Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI 
Sector have been constituted in accordance with the announcement made by the 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit 
Policy for the year 2003-04. 
  
 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
Chief General Manager 
 
Press Release: 2003-2004/962 
 