RBI launches Comprehensive Survey on Software and IT Exports
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has recently launched a comprehensive survey on the Software and IT services exports. In this comprehensive survey, software and IT exports companies have been requested to provide the information in the schedule supplied to them for the financial year ending March 2003, by January 31, 2004. The questionnaire for the survey can be downloaded from the RBI website www.rbi.org.in. It may be recalled that the National Statistical Commission (NSC) recommended to constitute a technical group consisting of members from the Reserve Bank of India, Ministry of Commerce, Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM) and a few major software companies to comprehensively examine the data reporting mechanism for software exports. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank had, in 2001, constituted a technical group for re-examination of the data reporting system on software exports. The Technical Group recommended, among others, to conduct a comprehensive survey (in the nature of census) every three years followed by quarterly representative surveys to collect data on software and IT exports. The information collected through the survey will be used for policy formulations, to give necessary thrust to the IT sector. The data will also be used for the purpose of compilation of Balance of Payments and National Accounts Statistics. As a sequel to the Technical Group, the Reserve Bank has constituted a 'Standing Monitoring Committee on Software Exports (SMCSE)' with members from concerned ministries in the Government of India, NASSCOM and the Reserve Bank for continuous monitoring of the data reported by the exporters in the new system, to resolve conceptual issues likely to arise from time to time in regard to the scope and coverage of software and IT exports, and to sort out methodological issues, etc.

Download the questionaire in pdf or doc format.

P.V. Sadanandan Manager Press Release : 2003-2004/814

