PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
May 29, 2004
RBI releases Report on DFIs on Website for Comments
The Reserve Bank of India today released the Report of the Working group on
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) (Chairman:Shri N. Sadasivan) on its website. The
Reserve Bank has invited comments/suggestions on the report which may be sent to the
Chief General Manager, Financial Institutions Division, Reserve Bank of India, World Trade
Centre, Mumbai-400005 or to Fax No. 2218 3579 or to amtiwari@rbi.org.in or
rajeshverma@rbi.org.in
It may be recalled that in order to address the regulatory and supervisory issues
relating to the existing term lending and refinancing institutions and for improving the flow of
resources to them, the Reserve Bank of India had, in the Mid Term Review of Monetary and
Credit Policy for 2003-04, set up a Working Group. The Working Groups examined, within
the broader framework of Non-banking Finance Companies (NBFCs), various regulatory and
supervisory aspects, including access to short term resources, for the Development Finance
Institutions (DFIs) as a separate category
Highlights:
• Banks may be permitted to raise long term resources through issuance of
development bonds for the purpose of long term project finance so that problems
of asset liability management can be taken care of.
• Only those DFIs which the Central Government decides to support, for the time
being, may continue as DFIs. The rest of the DFIs must convert to either a bank
or an NBFC. Further, no DFI should be established in future without the Central
Government support.
• The special status conferred on securities issued by public financial institutions
should be done away with.
• State Financial Corporations should be phased out within a definite time frame.
• No relaxations should be granted to the DFIs that convert into banks unless
mandated by a statute in respect of requirements such as minimum capital,
income recognition, asset classification and provisioning, capital adequacy,
maintenance of CRR and SLR, drawing of accounts and building of reserves,
permissible banking business etc.
• The regulation of these DFIs should be so designed as to ensure that the
regulatory framework along with the Government support available to the DFIs
works towards ensuring their financial soundness so that the overall systemic
stability is not endangered.
• Considering their systemic importance, the Reserve Bank may continue to
regulate the financial and related aspects of these DFIs irrespective of whether
they accept public deposits or not. All the recommendations for regulation made
for Development Finance Companies (DFC) except recommendations relating to
registration with the Reserve Bank, entry-point norms and composition of Board
of Directors should be made applicable to these four DFIs.  The Reserve Bank
may divest its ownership stakes in NABARD and NHB.
1• The Reserve Bank may ensure that the standard of regulations or supervision
exercised by the NHB, SIDBI and NABARD over the institutions falling under their
respective domains are broadly at par with that maintained by the Reserve Bank.
Till the state level DFIs established by statute such as SFCs are phased out,
suitable regulatory and supervisory powers in respect of these entities may be
vested in SIDBI.
• DFIs which have been constituted as companies and are performing
developmental roles should be classified as a new category of NBFCs called
‘Development Financial Companies' (DFCs) and subjected to uniform regulation.
All new DFIs should be set up as a company to be registered with the Reserve
Bank like all other NBFCs. The entry point norms for such DFCs should be set
sufficiently high at NOF of Rs.100 crore.
• DFCs accepting public deposits should maintain liquid assets as prescribed for
other NBFCs. They should also be statutorily required to transfer certain
proportion of annual profits to reserve funds.
• With a view to enabling the DFCs to access short term and medium term
resources to a larger extent and thereby reducing their cost of funds, the present
prescription of limiting such access to the extent of NOF may be done away with
in respect of those DFCs which comply with the Reserve Bank regulations.
• Considering their systemic significance, the DFCs for all practical purposes will
be regulated by the Reserve Bank and the supervisory process in respect of the
select DFIs may be extended to supervision of them as well.
• Even though the non public deposit taking companies are slated to be excluded
from the purview of Financial Companies Regulations Bill 2000, the Reserve
Bank should put in place as an initial measure, a system of periodical collection
of all information relevant to the systemic concerns pertaining to large sized non
public deposit taking companies say with total assets of Rs.500 crore and above.
This system may also be specified for public deposit taking companies to the
extent required.
• A cap in terms of Net Owned Funds (NOF) may be fixed for mobilisation of public
deposits by Residuary Non banking Companies. To avoid any hardship to the
existing RNBCs, the cap on public deposits may be fixed at a level of 16 times of
NOF, as an initial measure along with a direction that the RNBCs will ultimately
have to conform to the norms for raising of public deposits for NBFCs in general
i.e. four times or 1.5 times of NOF as applicable.  The time of such transition
should preferably be not more than five years.
• The Reserve Bank may fix suitable caps for RNBCs' exposures to capital market,
real estate, unlisted but rated securities and units of equity oriented mutual funds.
• Keeping in view the conscious policy of moving away from the administered
interests rate regime and also the prevalent interest rate, the floor limit on the rate
of interest which can be offered by the RNBCs to the depositors may be
removed.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2003-2004/1401
2