PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358, 2270 3279

Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 26, 2004 Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield distributed "The challenge before for the banks today is to take their customer services to the global level on the one hand and to reach their own people on other. The Reserve Bank has constituted a committee to examine how to bring the banking services closer to the people. The Reserve Bank has also asked the banks to constitute similar committees at their level. We hope that the banks will take this initiative in the right spirit and will focus more on making their functioning more customer-friendly and convenient. Since most of the people in India speak and understand Hindi, we will have to use Hindi as a medium of reaching the bank services to the customers." These views were expressed by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India while giving away the Rajbhasha Shields for the year 2001-02 and 2002-03 to the banks and financial institutions. The Shield distribution function was held in the Reserve Bank of India, Central Office Auditorium today. He also gave away the awards for the best house-journals and Inter Bank Hindi Essay Competitions. The annual Reserve Bank Rajbhasha Shield was instituted in 1980 to encourage public sector banks to use Hindi in their day-to-day working. Along with the scheme, the Reserve Bank also conducts a competition for the house journals of banks and financial institutions. The Reserve Bank has also initiated an Inter Bank Hindi Essay Competition from the year 2002-03. Smt. K. J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank, while complementing the winner banks and financial institutions, noted that most of the people either use Hindi as their mother tongue or they can understand it well. If the banks do most of their work in Hindi, the common man will find it easy to transect banking business, our staff will understand them better and in turn, our customer service will improve. She added that use of Hindi should not be only in compliance of the Official Languages Act, but also to provide better customer service. Earlier, Shri A. V. Sardesai, Executive Director welcomed the Governor, Deputy Governors and chief executives of banks and financial institutions. Shri G.K. Sharma, Chief General Manager-in-charge, Department of Administration and Personnel Management, Reserve Bank of India, proposed a vote of thanks. Dr. Rajeshwar Gangwar, Officer-in-charge, Rajbhasha Department of the Reserve Bank of India conducted the programme. The function was attended by the chairmen and other senior executives of the banks and financial institutions. The results are enclosed. Alpana Killawala Chief General Manager Press Release No:2003-2004/1135

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA RBI On Internet: http://www.rbi.org.in

