` PRESS RELEASE
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 2, 2004
RBI's Handbook on Statistics on Indian Economy on CD-ROM
The Reserve Bank of India has released a CD-Rom of its ‘Handbook of
Statistics on Indian Economy: 2003-04’. The print and web versions of the publications
were released earlier.
Prepared by the Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, The CD-Rom
has been designed to embrace intelligent search and download features which help in
downloading data from 233 statistical tables and nearly 5000 variables/data series
covering national income aggregates, output, prices, money, banking, financial
markets, public finances, trade and balance of payments indicators in a user defined
excel spreadsheet. The data downloaded in such form can be read by most standard
economic softwares for research analysis.
This year, the Handbook CD-Rom incorporates intelligent search features to
enhance the user friendliness by incorporating ‘Table Search’ and ‘Variable Search’
apart from the usual ‘Content Search’. The ‘Table Search’ enables a user to select a
data series from the drop down menu in a table using any keyword from the table title.
The ‘Variable Search’ enables a user to select one or more of data series for any
selected time frequency across the tables. Search across tables are horizontally
displayed in a single excel spreadsheet, which is user-friendly. Content search
displays the table along with the table numbers. Also there is the availability of chart
facility for variable as well as table search. Navigation facility across tables and within
tables running into more than one sheet, apart from calculator and notepad option,
enhances the user friendliness of the CD-Rom. The availability of above technical
features makes it at par with the best of its kind available.
 The Handbook CD-Rom is available for sale at the Sales Section, Reserve
Bank of India, Ground Floor, Amar  Building, P.M. Road, Fort, Mumbai – 400 001. The
CD-Rom can be obtained for an inland price of Rs.220 (Normal) or Rs.150
(concessional). The price for the overseas buyer is fixed at US$ 15. For those who
wish to buy the CD-Rom along with the print version, prices are fixed at Rs.400
(Normal), Rs.300 (concessional) and US$ 30 (overseas buyers).  All prices are
inclusive of postage.
Orders for the purchase can be placed with the Director, Division of Reports,
Reviews and Publications, Department of Economic Analysis & Policy, Reserve Bank
nd
of India, City Ice Building, 2 Floor, Perin Nariman Street, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001 on
payment through demand draft or cheque drawn in favour of the Reserve Bank of
India and payable at Mumbai only.
       Alpana Killawala
        Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/468