PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
         e-mail:helpprd@rbi.org.in
                                                                                                         November 18, 2004
President of India inaugurates
RBI Monetary Museum
The President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, today inaugurated the Reserve
Bank of India’s Monetary Museum. The first of its kind in India, the museum is located
on the ground floor of Amar Building, P.M.Road, Fort, Mumbai.  Dr. Y.V.Reddy,
Governor, Reserve Bank of India showed the President around the Museum.
Giving his comments, the President noted in the visitors' book, "It is a beautiful
idea and well presented. Hearty Congratulations". Among the dignitaries present were
Shri Ratan Tata and Dr. Ashok Ganguly, both members on the Central Board of
Directors of the Reserve Bank of India. Appreciating the efforts of the Reserve Bank in
bringing the monetary heritage of the country closer to the people, Shri Ratan Tata
recorded in the visitors' book that the Monetary Museum is "A very impressive display,
beautifully exhibited. A great addition to the city". Dr. Ganguly also found the Monetary
Museum "A wonderful historic journey of money".
As the central bank of the country, the Reserve Bank of India is the custodian of
the country’s monetary heritage. The RBI Monetary Museum aims at documenting,
preserving and presenting India’s monetary heritage to the public. The Museum is
expected, over time, to serve as the focal point for the Reserve Bank’s public education
and outreach programmes. The Museum will be open to public from January 2005.
On display are exhibits of money ranging from neolithic axes to stored value
cards. The displays are divided into three main galleries. The first gallery introduces the
visitor to concepts, ideas and curiosities relating to money, including, how has money
evolved from barter to the present and the shapes and sizes it has assumed over the
years. On display are some of the smallest coins in the world, the nomenclatures they
have assumed down the ages, their metals, alloys, etc.
th
The second section traces the evolution of coins from the 6 century BC to the
present with exhibits of representative coinage along with a chronology of events.
How did the transition take place from coins to bank notes? How did banking
evolve? These questions are addressed in the third section on bank notes. This section,
along with a tour of indigenous banking, hundies and other financial instruments, gives
th th
a glimpse of the early bank notes in India which evolved in the late 18 - early 19
century down to the present. The visitor is introduced briefly to how the demand and
supply of currency is managed in the country and the security features of bank notes. It
also gives the visitors a glimpse of the functions of the Reserve Bank of India.
For children, the Museum also has interactive information kiosks that have
games by playing which they can learn various aspects of currency and coins. The
kiosks also give more details about the displays in the Museum.                                                                                                                P.V.Sadanandan
                                                                                                                   Manager
Press Release: 2004-05/526