May 24, 2004
RBI releases Report on External Liabilities of Banks
for Comments
The Reserve Bank of India today placed the Report of the Internal Group on
External Liabilities of Scheduled Commercial Banks on its website. Inviting comments on
the Report, it has stated that they may be forwarded to Principal Monetary Policy
Adviser, Monetary Policy Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Shahid
Bhagat Singh Marg, Mumbai 400 001 [Fax: (91-22) 2265 1685/2269 3204; email:
helpmpd@rbi.org.in]. The Report has been released in pursuance of paragraph 112 of
the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05.
The Reserve Bank had constituted an Internal Group on External Liabilities of
Scheduled Commercial Banks to comprehensively review the status of external liabilities
of scheduled commercial banks and to examine various policy issues arising from there.
The Group submitted its report in April 2004.
In its Report, the Group has emphasised that external liabilities of banks need to
be seen in the overall context of external debt. Though the non-debt creating
remittances have been consistently accounting for a dominant component of Non-
Resident Indian (NRI) inflows, the non-resident deposits have substantially increased
their share in total external debt in the recent period. International liabilities of banks are
now nearly double of their international assets which is another issue that assumes
importance from the systemic point of view.
Against this background, the Group made the following major recommendations:
• Reserve and liquidity requirements on NRI deposits may be left unaltered for the
present.
• Non-Resident (External) (NRE) savings deposit interest rate may be delinked
from domestic savings deposit rate and may have the ceiling of one-month
LIBOR/SWAP rates on US dollar deposits.
• The interest rate on NRE term deposits may be changed to LIBOR of the
corresponding maturity.
• The non-banking financial companies and non-financial corporates should be
phased out from accepting NRI deposits and the acceptance of NRI deposits
should be restricted to only authorised dealers.
• The Resident Foreign Currency (RFC) scheme may be made non-interest
bearing. The Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency (EEFC) and Resident Foreign
Currency (Domestic) (RFC(D)) accounts should continue to remain non-interest
bearing.
• Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) deposits may have the nature of current/savings
accounts only. The existing NRO term/recurring deposits may be allowed to be
maintained till maturity.
• For better availability of export credit in foreign currency, the present ceiling on
interest on such credit may be deregulated. If complete deregulation is not
considered feasible, the interest rate ceiling may be raised by 50 basis points to‘LIBOR plus 125 basis’ points to ensure greater availability of export credit in
foreign currency.
• The interest income from NRI deposits may be made taxable on the lines of
domestic deposits consistent with the current account convertibility.
As indicated in the Annual Policy Statement for 2004-05, on the basis of these
recommendations, the Reserve Bank has already implemented the following measures:
• The interest rates on NRE term deposits for one to three years were reduced to
LIBOR/SWAP rates for US dollar of corresponding maturity, effective April 17,
2004.
• The ceiling on interest rate on NRE savings deposits was fixed at six-month US
dollar LIBOR/SWAP rate; and no lien on these accounts, direct or indirect, would
be permitted.
• Entities other than authorised dealers or authorised banks were disallowed,
effective April 24, 2004, from accepting fresh deposits from non-resident Indians,
received either through fresh inward remittances or by debit to their NRE/Foreign
Currency Non-Resident (Banks) (FCNR(B)) accounts.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2003-04/