PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 13, 2004
RBI Governor stresses Need for
Better  Fiscal Management at State Level
th
The 14 Conference of the State Finance Secretaries was held in the
Reserve Bank of India today. Finance Secretaries of 24 states participated.
Senior officials from Ministry of Finance, Government of India and
representatives from Comptroller and Auditor General attended the
Conference. Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
chaired the Conference. Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Executive Director,
Reserve Bank of India and other senior officials of the Reserve Bank were
present.
In his inaugural interaction with the State Finance Secretaries, Dr. Y.V.
Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India reiterated the need for greater fiscal
management at the state level to ensure completion of the approved
borrowings of the state governments. Dwelling on the subject of inflation and
interest rates the Governor stated that the Reserve Bank will continue to
carefully monitor the developments in the context of international and
domestic factors. Talking about improving the health of the cooperative banks,
the Governor felt that the dual control regime is a constraint of effective
regulation and welcomed the recent initiatives taken by the Government of
India. He urged the finance secretaries to impress upon their governments the
critical role of state governments, especially through the regional rural banks
in enhancing credit delivery to agriculture.
The Reserve Bank has been, since 1997, organising the State Finance
Secretaries' Conference twice every year. The Conference all through has
provided a very useful forum for interactions among State Finance
Secretaries, senior officials of Government of India, Planning Commission,
Comptroller and Auditor General, CGA and the Reserve Bank of India. The
State Finance Secretaries play a key role in the development process of their
respective States and in striving to achieve transparency, stability, fairness
and efficiency in the conduct of fiscal policies. The deliberations in the past
Conferences have served to arrive at a consensus on various issues in
furtherance of better financial management and fiscal prudence in the States.
Today's Conference aimed to take this consultative process further.
Important issues discussed in today's Conference included recent experience
in increased market borrowings by State Governments, enhancing the liquidity
of State Government securities, dimensions of debt sustainability of States,
credit enhancement for infrastructure financing at the State level, banking
arrangements for implementation of VAT, computerisation of loans to states2
given by the Central Government, financial position of State and District
Central Co-operative Banks and other procedural issues relating to
Government transactions and currency operations. Keeping in view the need
for rule based fiscal policy for achieving fiscal sustainability and ensuring
higher degree of transparency and disclosure in state budgets, a draft model
fiscal responsibility legislation at the state level was also discussed. The draft
model legislation was prepared by a Working Group comprising select State
Finance Secretaries, a representative each from the Government of India and
the Reserve Bank of India. It was also decided in the Conference to form two
Working Groups with representatives from select State Government on
(i) improving secondary market liquidity of State Development Loans and
(ii) methodology of compilation of data on various types of debt liabilities of the
States.
Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, in his concluding remarks hoped
that the state finance secretaries would continue to focus on the issue of debt
sustainability with a long term perspective and endeavour to find robust
solutions.
     Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/176