PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
June 14, 2004
RBI releases Report of the Working Group on Financial Conglomerates
for Public Comments
The Reserve Bank of India today placed for public comments the Report of the
Working Group on Financial Conglomerates on its website. The Report has been released in
pursuance of paragraph 131 of the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05. Comments
may please be sent to Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Department of Banking
Supervision, Reserve Bank of India, World Trade Centre, Mumbai 400 005 or to fax No.022-
22160932 or to e-mail ids gopalakrishnank@rbi.org.in or vchaturvedi@rbi.org.in
It may be recalled that the Governor had announced in the Mid-term Review of
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2003-04 about the decision taken in consultation with
the Chairman, Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Chairman, Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) for establishment of a special monitoring
system for Systemically Important Financial Intermediaries (SIFI). The Group has since been
renamed as the Working Group on Financial Conglomerates.
The Group has suggested criteria for identifying financial conglomerates, a monitoring
system for capturing intra-group transactions and exposures amongst such conglomerates
and a mechanism for inter-regulatory exchange of information in respect of conglomerates.
Highlights of the framework proposed by the Working Group are as under:
• The new framework is being proposed as a complementary strand to the already
existing regulatory structure - supervision of individual entities by respective regulators
viz. RBI, SEBI, IRDA and the system of Consolidated Prudential Reporting recently
introduced in regard to banks.
• A set of criteria has been prescribed for identification of financial conglomerates that
would be subject to focused supervisory oversight.
• Format has been designed to capture intra-group transactions and exposures amongst
group entities, group level exposures to various financial markets and outside
counterparties and direct/indirect cross linkages amongst group entities.
• A conglomerate entity identified as the  ‘designated entity’ would be responsible for
collating data in respect of all its group entities in the prescribed format and submitting
the same to its own regulator which would be the ‘Principal Regulator’ for the entire
conglomerate.
• One of the existing Technical Committees, consisting of all the three regulators, may
function as a standing inter-regulatory forum to address all issues arising out the
proposed framework.  The Technical Committee would also review the identification
criteria periodically.
• The framework envisages periodic sharing of information amongst regulators on
(i) concerns arising out of analysis of data received as part of the proposed format; and
(ii) any other information outside the reporting format that might have a bearing on the
group as a whole.
          Alpana Killawala
Press Release: 2003-2004/1458              Chief General Manager