` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
August 30, 2004
RBI Annual Report 2003-04: Highlights
The Reserve Bank of India released its Annual Report for 2003-04.
Some highlights:
Assessment of 2003-04
Overall Performance
The Indian economy recorded a strong performance during 2003-04.
While the main driver of growth was the resurgence of agricultural production
from the drought of the preceding year, the other factors included buoyant
external demand and continued industrial recovery. The performance of
agriculture in 2003-04 was typical of a normal monsoon year following a
drought year as has been observed on previous occasions. The notable
feature this time was the simultaneous and well distributed firming up of
activity in industry and services. Exports contributed significantly to higher
growth in a wide range of manufacturing industries – machinery and transport
equipment, automobiles, iron and steel, chemicals and chemical products –
attesting to the rising international competitiveness of Indian industry.
Capacity utilisation improved in several manufacturing industries as well as
in electricity generation and mining and quarrying. A robust expansion of
activity in trade, hotels, transport and communication paved the way for
strong growth of the services sector, well above the average for the period
1993-2003. Yet another heartening feature was the resilience of the
information technology enabled services and business process outsourcing
activities despite some evidence of increasing protectionist postures in major
international markets.
Significant gains were posted in the external sector, indicative of a
growing resilience of the economy to cushion domestic activity against
external and internal shocks. The run of current account surpluses that
began in 2001-02 was extended into 2003-04 – a steady rise from 0.2 per
cent of GDP to 1.4 per cent. The foreign exchange reserves rose to US $ 113
billion by end-March 2004 and further to US$ 119.3 billion as on August 13,
2004.
Monetary Developments
Monetary policy assigned priority to the revival of investment demand
in the economy in 2003-04 in an environment of macroeconomic and financial
stability. The expansionary effects of large capital inflows posed a challenge
to monetary policy, especially since the absorption of liquidity through non-
food credit remained lacklustre except in the last quarter of the year. This2
necessitated policy intervention almost continuously throughout the year to
sterilise the capital flows and prevent undue monetary expansion. The
institution of the Market Stabilisation Scheme in April 2004, which provides
for issuance of Government securities exclusively for sterilisation operations,
enhances the capacity of the Reserve Bank to deal with capital flows in
future. Another noteworthy feature of macroeconomic management in 2003-
04 was the reining in of inflationary pressures. Inflation receded in the first
half of the year, reaching a trough in August 2003, before being driven up
almost continuously up to January 2004 by a combination of international and
domestic factors. By the end of the year, however, inflation had retreated to
the levels anticipated by the Reserve Bank.
During 2003-04, domestic financial markets experienced orderly and
stable activity in general, under conditions of ample liquidity. The yield curve
steepened in the latter part of the year, driven by market expectations
relating to inflationary pressures and the raising of some major international
interest rates. The foreign exchange market witnessed orderly conditions
during the year. The exchange rate of the rupee appreciated against the US
dollar, but depreciated against Euro, Pound Sterling and Japanese Yen
during the period.
Financial Stability
Efficient functioning of the financial system and an environment of
financial stability were concurrent pursuits of the Reserve Bank. In 2003-04
heightened sensitivity to these objectives was reflected in the stance of
financial policies. Issues relating to corporate governance and appropriate
disclosures were the focus of the conduct of financial regulation. At the same
time, prudential norms and supervision continued to be tightened and
benchmarked to international best practices and the emphasis also continued
to shift from micro regulation to risk-based supervision. A significant
development during the year was a successful pilot run for risk-based
supervision (RBS), aimed at allocating supervisory resources in accordance
with the risk profile of banks. The initiatives taken in recent years were
reflected in the significant improvement in profitability, asset quality and
capital across the financial system.
OUTLOOK FOR 2004-05
GDP Growth Rate
Early developments in 2004-05 present several continuing strengths in
the economy though accompanied by some uncertainties.
A clearer assessment of rainfall, as the monsoon progresses into central
India and northern plains, will enable a firmer prognosis of the prospects for
agriculture. The industrial climate reflects a revival of investment demand
and building up of capacity. In particular, the capital goods and the
intermediate goods sectors have recorded robust growth signifying the
quickening of investment activity. This has been supported by improved
corporate profitability, expansion in non-food credit and continuing optimism
regarding production and export growth. On the other hand, production of
consumer goods has slowed down considerably with the sustained growth in
consumer durables providing a silver lining. The growth of the services
sector is expected to build upon the momentum achieved in the preceding3
year and be sustained above trend levels. In view of the above, on current
indications, while the prospects for GDP growth continue to be bright, in
particular, due to a possible acceleration in growth of world output and
enhanced domestic investment activity, there are also downside risks
emanating from uncertain monsoon as well as the possible persistence of
high and uncertain oil prices. These risks impart an element of downward
bias to the estimates of GDP growth made at the beginning of the year but
evolving strengths during the rest of the year may restore the position and in
any case India will continue to be among the top performers globally.
Price Situation
Inflation, measured by year-on-year changes in the wholesale price
index (WPI), has been edging up since May 15, 2004 driven up by prices of
iron and steel, iron ore, mineral oils, coal and vegetables. The CPI inflation,
however, continues to be at moderate levels. Over the rest of the year,
pressures from international prices on domestic inflation are expected to
moderate although considerable uncertainty surrounds the short-term
movements in international crude oil prices, which would influence the
domestic inflation outlook. Another important factor which would determine
the inflation outlook in India is the progress of the monsoon, after taking into
account the shortfalls and uneven spread of rainfall in July which is the
sowing month of the kharif season. The overhang of liquidity would also need
to be carefully monitored in view of its potential to pose demand pressures
on prices. The outlook for headline inflation is, on current indications, less
optimistic than what was envisaged at the beginning of the year. Price
pressures could be a cause of some concern though it remains to be seen
how the imported price shocks would evolve globally and be absorbed
domestically. The comfortable level of foreign exchange reserves, however,
provides the wherewithal for ensuring adequate supplies and for moderating
inflationary pressures on the common man. The inflation environment needs
to be monitored closely on a continuous basis for any unforeseen
developments either in the global or in the domestic environment, with a view
to considering prompt as well as measured responses, as appropriate.
Monetary Management
The stance of monetary policy for 2004-05 continues to be guided by
the objectives of provision of adequate liquidity for meeting credit growth and
to support investment and export demand while keeping a very close watch
on the movements in the price level. Consistent with the above, while
continuing with the status quo, monetary policy would pursue an interest rate
environment that is conducive to maintaining the momentum of growth as
well as ensuring macroeconomic and price stability. The confluence of global
factors - in particular, the rise in international interest rates - and domestic
developments with respect to capital flows, liquidity management and the
unforeseen impact of supply shocks have necessitated close and careful
monitoring of price trends, keeping in view the policy preference for stability.
In this background, the need, the extent and the timing of review of the policy
stance would depend not only on these unfolding circumstances but also on
the adjustments that take place in the financial markets, given their
sensitivity to the global and domestic conditions. Finally, monetary policy
would continue to enhance the integration of various segments of the4
financial market, upgrade credit delivery systems, nurture a conducive credit
culture and improve the quality of financial services.
The pursuit of price stability remains a key objective of monetary
policy, especially in a country like India where a large majority of the
population have no insurance against inflation. There is, thus, a need to
consolidate the gains from reining in inflationary expectations especially as
cross-country experiences suggest that public confidence can dissipate very
quickly in the case of adverse movements in prices. An added dimension is
the increasing sensitivity of domestic inflation to the movements in
international commodity prices, with the opening up of the economy. The
pursuit of price stability in future will call for a carefully crafted strategy in
which monetary policy will not only need to address the demand side of the
economy but also strike a fine balance in assessing the supply side of
inflation, while enhancing prospects for growth.
Real Sector
Agriculture
It is an imperative that the agricultural growth rate is enhanced to
around 4 per cent per annum as the critical minimum in order to sustain an
overall growth trajectory of the economy at 7 per cent and more. If
agricultural growth were to continue at its long-term average of 2.5 to 3.5 per
cent, it would be difficult for industry and services to grow in the range of 9-
10 per cent that would be necessary to attain the overall growth rate of 7 to 8
per cent. To attain higher growth in agriculture, the major areas requiring
attention in the financial sector are, inter alia, spread of insurance against
crop losses, development of commodity-derivatives market to minimise the
impact of price uncertainties and facilities for meeting the entire - not merely
the credit - needs of the rural economy.
Industry
The recovery of the industrial sector which began in the first quarter of 2002-03
has been steadily gaining momentum. Indian industry is engaged in a process of
transformation due to competitive pressures, rapid technological progress, deregulation
of product and financial markets and organisational change. An issue of concern has
been the fluctuations in industrial output in the second half of 1990s with
adverse consequences for the competitiveness of manufactured products.
While export demand imparts a competitive dynamism to industry, there is a
need to broad-base competitiveness over a wider spectrum of products.
Moreover, while strong export demand tends to support overall industrial
demand, there is a need to generate domestic demand on a more enduring
basis to sustain the growth momentum.
Services
The services sector has emerged as the engine of growth of the Indian
economy. The strength of the services sector needs to be leveraged in view
of its enormous growth potential and positive externalities for the commodity
producing sectors. While the rising share of services in the GDP is an
encouraging sign of greater degree of diversification of the Indian economy,
the corresponding decline in the shares of commodity producing sectors
implies that overall productivity gains in the economy would depend5
increasingly on the degree of efficiency attained by the services sector. The
sustainability of high growth of services would hinge upon high quality of
production and delivery, continuous improvement in productivity and pro-
active supply responses in markets where tastes and patterns change
rapidly.
Fiscal Policy
An important goal of fiscal consolidation through the implementation of
FRBM Rules, 2004 is to eliminate the revenue deficit by 2008-09. This is
sought to be achieved by raising the tax-GDP ratio through augmentation of
tax receipts from sustained growth and better compliance. Moreover,
emphasis needs to be on withdrawing exemptions and rationalising the tax
structure so as to eliminate subjectivity in the tax system. In this context, it is
also worthwhile to explore the applicability of a uniform tariff rate on imports.
Given the downward rigidities characterising revenue expenditure, the
attainment of the goals set out in the FRBM Rules would be contingent upon
the realisation of the assumed revenue buoyancies.
External Sector
The growing strength of India’s external sector has provided the
enabling conditions to accelerate the pace of external liberalisation. This has
considerably mitigated the inward-looking bias of past regimes and has
brought forth a healthy response in terms of export earnings and the inflow of
remittances. Liberalisation of foreign exchange transactions has to be
backed up by price alignments in the form of reduction in tariff rates. The
experience of most emerging markets suggests that internationally
competitive tariff rates contribute towards export performance on a sustained
basis.
Financial Sector
The Reserve Bank has been focusing on developing a competitive
operating environment in the financial sector in terms of markets, institutions,
products and practices. The litmus test of regulatory design in a competitive
environment is to strengthen financial stability while at the same time
minimising the costs of financial regulation. This, in turn, implies that as the
process of deregulation deepens, regulatory initiatives have to be reoriented
towards more pro-active supervision of the financial system. It is in this
context that the Reserve Bank’s supervisory strategy has been to move away
from micro-prescription oriented on-site supervision to risk-based
supervision. A key element of a market-oriented risk-based supervisory
strategy is to develop sound corporate governance practices, which would
minimise the need for process-focussed supervision. The Reserve Bank,
therefore, has been emphasising corporate governance and better risk
assessment within banks and financial institutions, both public and private.
The Reserve Bank favours a process of gradual convergence with
international standards and best practices with suitable country-specific
adaptations. This has also been the guiding principle in the approach to the
New Basel Accord. Having decided, in principle, in April 2003 to adopt the
Basel Accord, the Reserve Bank is overseeing a road map for migration to
Basel II with reviews of the progress made at quarterly intervals.6
Considerable progress has been made in preparing the ground for
realising the full potential of the Indian economy. The drag imposed by high
levels of unemployment, poverty and inequity has brought to the fore the
urgency attached to actualising this potential. This is consistent with the
renewed emphasis on equity in the reorientation of growth strategy that is
underway. The process of structural reforms has imparted a resilience and a
momentum to the economy even as the pursuit of macroeconomic and
financial stability has produced gains in terms of low and stable inflation
relative to several emerging economies and a vibrant and well-functioning
financial system equipped with the wherewithal of intermediating the
financing requirements of high and sustained growth. The regulatory and
supervisory function is getting increasingly tuned to the fast changing
financial environment. Issues in governance and transparency are at the
forefront of this change even as efforts are being intensified to put in place
the appropriate legislative framework for the smooth functioning of the
financial sector.
                                                                                                     Alpana Killawala
                                                                                                    Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/235