` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF
INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406,
www.rbi.org.in
Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 29, 2004
RBI releases Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India-2003-04
The Reserve Bank of India has released today its Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in
India, 2003-04. The Report gives a detailed account of the performance of and policy developments
relating to commercial banks, co-operative banks, financial institutions and non-banking financial
companies during 2003-04. A chapter on financial stability covering various emerging issues has been
introduced. The Report is divided into eight Chapters and contains detailed statistical tables on various
parameters for banks and other types of financial institutions.
Overview
The first chapter titled ‘Overview’ provides a synoptic view of the macroeconomic developments
and the performance of various types of financial intermediaries during 2003-04. It is found that the Indian
banking system posted a strong performance during 2003-04. The financial performance of the other
segments of the financial sector, viz., co-operative banks, financial institutions, and non-banking financial
companies (NBFCs) also registered improvement in various areas induced by the supporting regulatory
and supervisory process.
Policy Developments in Commercial Banking
 The second chapter on 'Policy Developments in Commercial Banking' provides an overview of
the policy initiatives undertaken in the banking sector during 2003-04. Regulatory and supervisory
changes including technological developments and legal reforms have been covered in this chapter. The
Reserve Bank continued to strengthen the supervisory framework consistent with the increasing market
orientation of the economy and with a view to achieving financial stability. The policy measures have
been primarily guided by the objectives of increasing operational efficiency of monetary policy, redefining
the role of the Reserve Bank, strengthening prudential norms and risk management, enhancing credit
delivery mechanism and developing technological and institutional infrastructure. This was buttressed by
several initiatives to enhance accounting standards and reinforce corporate governance.
Developments in Commercial Banking
The third chapter on ‘Developments in Commercial Banking' provides an analysis of the balance
sheet and financial performance of scheduled  commercial  banks  in  the  aggregate and separately for
the major banking groups, viz., public sector banks, new and old private sector banks and foreign banks.
The analysis covers important financial indicators, such as, income, expenditure, profits, spread, non-
performing assets and capital to risk-weighted assets ratio. In addition, the chapter details a
disaggregated picture of balance sheet and income-expenditure statement of commercial banks. The
empirical analysis highlights the continued stronger performance of banks in terms of higher profitability,
improvement in capital adequacy and lower non-performing assets. The credit delivery mechanism is
analysed in terms of banks’ lending to various sectors/industries including the priority sector. Besides the
balance sheet and income expenditure analyses, the chapter provides analysis of banks’ money market
operations pertaining to certificates of deposits, commercial papers, the role of banks as authorised
dealers etc. Keeping in view the increasing openness of financial sector, the chapter analyses the
composition of international assets and liabilities of banks. The chapter also provides an analysis of the
performance of regional rural banks, and local area banks.Developments in Co-operative Banking
Major developments and the regulatory initiatives relating to co-operative credit institutions
undertaken during 2003-04 are discussed in the fourth chapter on 'Developments in Co-operative
Banking'. The performance and issues relating to urban co-operative banks and the short-term and long-
term structure of the rural co-operative banks are discussed separately. Emphasis is laid on the role of
NABARD and issues of credit delivery under Rural Infrastructure Development Fund, Kisan Credit Card,
etc. Issues relating to micro credit are also discussed separately. The policy induced changes in the
composition of assets of Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs), especially, the growth in the investment of
Government securities, led to a significant improvement in both the asset quality and profitability of
scheduled UCBs.
Financial Institutions
 The Chapter V on ‘Financial Institutions’ discusses the reversal of the declining trend in
sanctions and disbursements by the financial institutions (FIs). This was on account of substantial
improvement shown by investment institutions and to an extent, by specialised FIs. The focus of the
policy initiatives by the Reserve Bank and the Government of India has been on financial as well as
organisational restructuring to facilitate their transition into universal banks. The Reserve Bank has been
harmonising its various policy measures for banks and FIs in such a manner that FIs, on becoming
banks, are in a position to fully integrate themselves into the banking system. Policy initiatives for select
all-India financial institutions laid emphasis on asset classification and provisioning, disclosures,
consolidated accounting and supervision, and measures to facilitate market developments. As far as
financial performance is concerned, the assets side has shown a compositional shift from loans and
advances to investments and holding of more liquid assets. As at the end of March 2004, most of the FIs,
barring IFCI and IIBI had CRAR much above the stipulated norm of 9 per cent.
Non-Banking Financial Companies
The sixth chapter on 'Non-Banking Financial Companies' discusses current initiatives in the field
of  regulation  and  supervision  including  introduction  of  reporting
framework for non-deposit accepting/holding NBFCs of asset size of Rs.500 crore and above. The
balance sheet of the NBFCs are discussed with particular focus on their deposit taking activities in terms
of their various attributes, such as, size, region, type of NBFCs, maturity and interest rate offered, etc.
Besides, the financial soundness indicators such as CRAR, NPAs, etc. are reported alongside indicators
of financial performance which witnessed a marked improvement. The developments related to RNBCs
with special emphasis on their investment norms and primary dealers are discussed separately. The
emerging structure of the NBFC sector as envisaged in various policy initiatives of the Reserve Bank
including phasing out of public deposits of NBFCs, a roadmap for RNBCs and the role of primary dealers
in the context of Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, etc. are also discussed.
Financial Stability
Financial stability has evolved as an increasingly important goal of policy across countries. In
India, ensuring stability of the financial system has been the central plank of financial sector reforms. The
Chapter on Financial Stability is introduced for the first time in the Report. This chapter primarily focuses
on the role of the Reserve Bank pertaining to instruments, institutions, and markets, and the regulatory
and supervisory framework instituted for detecting, preventing and managing financial instability.
Perspectives
A medium-term forward looking outlook encompassing the strengthening of prudential norms and
the structural changes underway in the banking system with a view to achieving financial stability is
provided in the final chapter on ‘Perspectives’.
The Report is available on the RBI website (www.rbi.org.in).
Ajit Prasad
 Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/560