PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
November 4, 2004
RBI releases the Report of the Working Group on Screen Based Trading in
Government Securities
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) today placed the Report of the “Working Group
on Screen Based Trading in Government Securities” on its website.
 To improve the use of the Negotiated Dealing System (NDS), particularly as a
trading platform, and also to encourage electronic screen based order matching on
NDS, the Reserve Bank of India had constituted a Working Group under the
chairmanship of Dr. R H Patil, Chairman, Clearing Corporation of India Limited  (CCIL).
The Working Group covered three broad areas viz., (i) technical issues related to NDS,
(ii) trading of Government securities on the NDS, and (iii) developing a retail market for
Government securities on the stock exchanges.
On technical issues related to NDS, the Group recommended enhancement of
bandwidth and prioritising bandwidth utilisation of INFINET to improve efficiency,
putting all the NDS related transactions on another dedicated telecommunication
network within the INFINET framework, independent technical study of INFINET and
constitution of a user group for NDS, apart from some software and hardware related
suggestions on NDS.
The Working Group also recommended the introduction of an electronic order-
matching module within NDS for trading in Government securities. Such a trading
platform is envisaged to have substantial advantages like better access, improved
transparency, more efficient price discovery and better liquidity and it will further
improve the trading capabilities of the NDS.
The Working Group felt that an exchange platform is best suited for entities who
transact Government securities in small lots. Non-NDS members should, therefore, be
encouraged to move to stock exchanges appropriately.
The Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05 had
indicated that the Report of the Group would be placed in the public domain for wider
dissemination.
      Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release : 2004-2005/484