PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
December 24, 2004
Dealing with Customer Complaints of Credit Cards:
RBI asks banks to be more sensitive to customer complaints:
IBA to evolve a Code of Conduct for Credit Card Issuing Banks
At a meeting of banks issuing credit cards held today, by the Reserve
Bank of India in Mumbai, it was decided that the Indian Banks' Association along
with some large credit cards issuing banks will evolve a code of conduct to be
voluntarily adopted by the banks issuing credit cards. The meeting was held in
the wake of significant concerns that had arisen of late in regard to credit card
operations of banks. The Reserve Bank also stressed on the need for the card
issuing banks to educate the customers on their rights and duties relating to
credit cards.
The Reserve Bank of India had, of late, been receiving a large number of
complaints from various organisations, associations, media and members of the
public against credit card issuing banks. The complaints centred round
harassment of customers, receiving unsolicited cards, wrongful activation of
cards, lack of transparency in levying service charges/other charges and
absence of an effective grievance redressal machinery. The focus of today's
meeting was, therefore, on examining all those issues so that customers
grievances could be resolved and complaints against credit card operations of
banks were redressed and minimised.
The banks assured the Reserve Bank that they had systems in place to
check the level of service rendered by DSAs and also had mechanism for
redressal of customer grievances. They, however, pointed out that it was difficult
to prevent sale of databases in the absence of any strict privacy laws in the
country which in turn made it difficult to control unsolicited calls.
The Reserve Bank of India reiterated that the banks issuing credit cards to
be more receptive to customer complaints and constitute proper grievance
redressal cells in their banks to mitigate the hardships caused to the credit card
customers. Banks were also advised to issue appropriate code of conduct to
Direct Selling Agents (DSAs)  marketing their credit card products and cautioned
to preemptive steps to prevent avoidable litigations.
To mitigate the customer hardships in this area, the Reserve Bank had
recently also set up a Working Group for evolving a regulatory mechanism for
credit cards. The Working Group would, among other things, suggest the type of
regulatory measures which are required for plastic cards so as to encourage their2
growth in a safe, secure and efficient manner; to recommend measures to be
introduced to ensure that the rules, regulations, standards and practices of the
card issuers are in alignment with the best customer practices; to draw a road
map of setting up a grievance redressal mechanism for the card user and to
educate the customers about their rights and duties. The Reserve Bank has also
requested members of public to send their suggestions on these areas to
cardsgroupdit@rbi.org.in
It may be recalled that the Governor, Reserve Bank of India, in his Mid-
term Review of the Annual Policy of 2004-2005 in October, 2004, had announced
the setting up of a Working Group for regulatory measures for credit cards.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release No./2004-2005/663