` PRESS RELEASE
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
May 28, 2004
Tarapore Committee on Banking Regulations
Banks to formulate Policy on Depositors' Rights
The Reserve Bank of India will advise the banks to formulate by July 31, 2004 a
transparent and comprehensive policy setting out the rights of depositors in general and
small depositors in particular. The policy would be required to cover all aspects of operations
of deposit accounts, charges leviable and other related issues to facilitate interaction. The
Reserve Bank will also issue a master circular on all aspects of maintenance of deposit
accounts and settlement of claims of deceased depositors after undertaking a thorough
review of these areas in consultation with the Indian Banks Association. The Reserve Bank
proposes to take these steps to alleviate the difficulties of the common person in his dealings
with the banks. The measures will be taken on the lines of the suggestions made by the
Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services: Banking Operations
(Chairman : Shri S.S. Tarapore).
It may be recalled that as a follow-up of the Mid-Term Review Monetary and Credit
Policy undertaken in November 2003, the Reserve Bank of India had set up a Committee on
Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore,
former Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India). The Tarapore Committee examined the
Reserve Bank's procedures and performance under four different areas affecting individual
customer transactions. These were foreign exchange, Government transactions, banking
operations and currency management. The Tarapore Committee submitted its reports
between January and April 2004. The Reserve Bank has examined the recommendations of
the Tarapore Committee and has initiated steps for their implementation in each area. The
action taken by the Reserve Bank in each area is being released separately.
The Reserve Bank of India has also forwarded the recommendations of the Tarapore
Committee to banks for follow-up action through their internal Ad hoc Committees on
Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services.
The Reserve Bank of India has urged the Ad hoc Committees to initiate necessary
steps for simplification of procedures and practice in these areas especially for transactions
of individuals. It has also advised the bank level Ad hoc Committees to ensure the presence
of trained and knowledgeable staff at the first point of interface with customers.
The other recommendations of the Tarapore Committee are:
• Reverse the disenfranchisement of the depositor and start the process of
empowering of the depositor.
• The banks and the regulator should have responsibility to act proactively.• Both the Reserve Bank and the banks should appoint Quality Assurance Officers
who will ensure that the intent of policy is translated into the content and its eventual
translation into proper procedures.
• The Indian Banks' Association may be asked to issue a comprehensive model
operational procedure which could be considered by banks.
• The Indian Banks' Association should launch a countrywide customer education
campaign informing customers of difficulties arising out of single accounts, accounts
without nomination, and jointly operated accounts.
• Training in technical areas of banking to the staff at delivery points must be
intensified.
• The Indian Banks' Association should forthwith evolve a model deposit policy
recognising the rights of the depositor and circulate it among its members for
adoption by the individual bank boards.
                                                                                                  Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2003-2004/1395