`
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿?¸ƒÄ 400 001
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
August 25, 2004
RBI Governor meets Bankers and Industry Associations
A meeting was held in the Reserve Bank of India today with select
bankers and representatives of industry associations, such as, IBA, PDAI,
FIMMDA and FEDAI. Dr. Y V Reddy, Governor chaired the meeting. Smt. K J
Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Smt. S Gopinath and Smt. Usha Thorat, executive
directors, Shri D Anjaneyulu, Principal Monetary Policy Adviser, Dr. N D
Jadhav, Principal Adviser, Department of Economic Analysis and Policy and
other senior officials of the Reserve Bank were also present.
Various issues discussed in the meeting included, the global and the
domestic economic environment, as well as financial markets, the divergence
in the measurement of inflation as reflected in the WPI/PPI and CPI globally,
the recent trends in the external sector and the government securities markets
in India and their impact on the financials of the banking sector and primary
dealers.
The participants made several suggestions in regard to the extant
accounting norms applicable to the banks’ investments, policy intervention of
the Reserve Bank in the government securities markets as also the market
borrowing programme of the government and innovations in the government
securities market.
Specific suggestions made by the participants to provide comfort to
financial markets related to several areas.  It was felt that unwinding of
overhang of liquidity should be allowed to take place gradually.  To provide
some comfort to financial markets, the liquidity management by the Reserve
Bank may include careful calibration in the conduct of Market Stabilisation
Scheme and Central as well as States’ borrowing programme, which may
include a review of the calendar.  Further, they preferred shorter duration of
new issues by government, issue of floating rate bonds as also capital
indexed bonds by Government at this stage. Moreover, there are some
aspects, compared to international accounting practices, in the classification
and valuation of investment portfolio, which get exacerbated in times of
unusual volatility in financial markets adversely affecting the balance sheet
and responses of banks and primary dealers. Hence they desired that these
be addressed urgently, taking account of the uniquely Indian stipulation of
25% as SLR. In addition on the analogy of RBI taking some measures in the
nature of “speed breakers”, say through a window of OMO’s, when the yields
fell rapidly, they wanted RBI to consider similar approach when the yields arerising rapidly, as is the case now.  Any such operation should be only to
provide comfort of liquidity at the market determined rates consistent with
yield curve.  Overall, the market participants felt that there is considerable
merit in continuing to give weight to stability at this juncture to meet not only
the current concerns in bond and money markets, but also to avoid the
prospects of inducing stagflation in as much as a significant reason for current
hike in WPI is due to supply shock.  It was also indicated that stability in
government securities market will have a positive impact on corporate bond
markets also.
The suggestions for medium term also covered several areas.  Some
of the participants focussed on the role of Wholesale (or Producer, as is called
in other countries) Price Index, Consumer Price Index and that of asset prices
in influencing the inflationary expectations and policy response and suggested
that they be addressed in addition to the measurement and divergence issues
of the indices currently under examination in India.  Many participants urged
that serious consideration be given to permitting short selling, futures and
when-issued market as medium term measures to improve government
securities market. The issue of the tightening of provisioning norms for state-
guaranteed loans was raised by bankers who requested that they be deferred
beyond one year to give time to state governments and banks to adjust to the
proposed norms.  More generally it was noted that for several decades,
interest rates were steady and some times in double digits in India. In recent
years, there has been a down trend which benefited all. It is but natural for the
markets to have interest-rate cycles. There was a feeling that the market
participants and others need to appreciate and be prepared for such cycles.
However, since this is first time in India, some measures of “healing touch” by
RBI at operational level would be appropriate, without necessarily linking all
such measures to overall stance of monetary policy.
The Governor explained that the Reserve Bank, like other central
banks, is closely monitoring the developments. He noted the sentiments of the
participants in favour of minimising volatility in domestic financial markets,
though the uncertainties in global factors have turned more adverse since the
announcement of the Annual Policy in May 2004. He assured, however, that
on suggestions relating to operational aspects, there would be consideration
in RBI on a priority basis. More intense consultations on medium term issues
flagged in the meeting will be held with the respective Advisory Committees of
RBI in which market participants are also represented.
The Governor reiterated the importance accorded to the primary
objective of maintaining price stability and consequently containing inflationary
expectations, while giving due consideration to growth in output and
employment. He added that the progress made in moderating inflationary
expectations would have to be maintained.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-05/220