PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358, 2270 3279

Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in
March 20, 2004

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA RBI On Internet: http://www.rbi.org.in

India's Bond Markets have Potential to be the Largest and the Most Efficient: RBI Deputy Governor The Government securities (G-sec) market in India is now well-developed with institutions, intermediaries, technology, processes and such other infrastructure and has laid down the foundations for the development of a corporate debt market. With the largeness of the country and its financial markets, India can well be the largest and the most efficient bond market in Asia in the next decade. The efforts that have gone into achieving the level of development in the G-sec market, however, only illustrate the effort that the regulators, the market participants and the self regulatory organisations will have to undertake to develop the corporate debt market. This was the undertone of the Reserve Bank of India's Deputy Governor, Dr. Rakesh Mohan's remarks at the Fifth FIMMDA-PDAI Annual Conference held in Dubai on March 20, 2004. Paying rich tributes to Dr. Y V Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Rakesh Mohan said that it was Dr. Reddy who had laid down the road map for the development of the G-sec market in India at a FIMMDA-PDAI conference two years back at Bangkok. The clarity and practicality of the road map were evident in the progress report that he was presenting today which showed a high level of achievement. Dr. Rakesh Mohan then gave a detailed account of the developments in the G-sec market to demonstrate that the market now had the necessary infrastructure, institutions and instruments as also processes well in place. However, there was scope for further improvement if India's G-sec market is to become one of the most efficient bond markets in the world and added that the Reserve Bank will continue with further consolidation of the government debt market. He said that the repo market would be widened to include corporate entities to participate with adequate safeguards. He also indicated that the Reserve Bank will soon issue guidelines on the sale of securities purchased previously to take care of price risk and rollover of repos, DVP III mode of settlement and making the call money market exclusively for banks as announced in the Monetary Policy of November 2003. The Reserve Bank was also actively considering the index linked bonds. The role of the Primary Dealers would be enlarged and the issue of granting limited exclusivity in primary

