PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
   May 28, 2004
Tarapore Committee Recommendations on Government
Transactions relating to Individuals
The Reserve Bank of India has standardised the application form for
Savings Bonds and has made it uniform across all its offices as also with
agency bank branches. The application form has an attachment giving the
details of the scheme and deliverables. The form has also been made available
on the RBI website at (www.goisb.rbi.org.in). The applicants wanting to invest
in Savings Bonds can now download the form, fill it up and submit it to any
office of the Reserve Bank or agency bank branch.
The Reserve Bank has also updated and publicised a citizens' charter
for all its departments handling government business. Further, it has issued a
master circular containing its instructions relating to handling of government
and Relief/Savings Bonds business. Offices of the Reserve Bank also organise
customer meets to spread awareness of the rights of the customers. The
Reserve Bank has also put in place a system of imposing penalties on banks
for infringement of customer's rights and to obtain feedback from the customers
about the services being rendered in its offices. This was in compliance with the
recommendations of the Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on
Public Services (Tarapore Committee).
It may be recalled that that as a follow-up of the Mid-Term Review
Monetary and Credit Policy undertaken in November 2003, the Reserve Bank
of India had set up a Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on
Public Services (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore, former Deputy Governor,
Reserve Bank of India). The Tarapore Committee examined the Reserve
Bank's procedures and performance under four different areas affecting
individual customer transactions. These were foreign exchange, Government
transactions, banking operations and currency management. The Tarapore
Committee submitted its reports between January and April 2004. The Reserve
Bank has examined the recommendations of the Tarapore Committee and has
initiated steps for their implementation in each area. The action taken by the
Reserve Bank in each area is being released separately.The Reserve Bank of India has also forwarded the recommendations of
the Tarapore Committee to banks for follow-up action through their internal
Ad hoc Committees on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services.
The Reserve Bank of India has urged the Ad hoc Committees to initiate
necessary steps for simplification of procedures and practice in these areas
especially for transactions of individuals. It has also advised the bank level Ad
hoc Committees to ensure the presence of trained and knowledgeable staff at
the first point of interface with customers.
                                                                                        Alpana Killawala
                                                        Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2003-2004/1393