PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001 Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358, 2270 3279

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA RBI On Internet: http://www.rbi.org.in Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in March 24, 2004

China and India take measures to develop comprehensive Trade and Economic Cooperation The Sino-Indian Joint Study Group (JSG) on Trade & Economic Cooperation opened a two-day working meeting in Beijing on 22nd March, 2004 to work out measures for comprehensive Trade and Economic Cooperation and to discuss the possibility of signing a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA). During the meeting, the Chinese Minister of Commerce Bo Xilai met the leader of the Indian delegation Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Rakesh Mohan and his delegation. The meeting was jointly chaired by Vice Minister of Commerce An Min and the Deputy Governor of RBI, Dr. Rakesh Mohan. The mandate of the Joint Study Group was given by the Prime Ministers of India and China in June 2003 during the visit of Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee to China and enshrined in the Sino-Indian Joint Declaration signed during the visit. Mr. Bo Xilai said China and India are neighbours with glorious ancient cultures which have laid a lasting basis for traditional exchanges between the two countries. The stories of Tang dynasty monks fetching scriptures from India are well-known to the Chinese. India and China are two fast developing economies with excellent cooperation in bilateral and multilateral fora, which is indeed encouraging. Last year, Sino-Indian trade turnover was US $ 7.6 billion with an increase of 53.6%. There are strong economic complementarities between China and India with a bright future for economic cooperation. The two sides would work out a clear time table and study the areas of cooperation for trade, investment and other areas and work out a specific 5-Year programme for economic cooperation. He believed Sino-Indian Trade and Economic relations would develop further with the joint efforts of the two sides. Dr. Mohan said India and China are the two countries in the world with more than 1 billion population each. The two Governments have similar problems and concerns relating to economic development and for improving the standard of living of their people. There is enormous potential for economic cooperation between China and India. The Indian side is willing to strengthen understanding and cooperation and together attain the goals of the JSG thereby contributing to mutual economic development. They also discussed the framework, work contents and other modalities of the functioning of the JSG. Both sides expressed confidence that they would work together in order to be able to submit to the two governments economic and trade cooperation proposals by end December 2004. The JSG comprises of officials and economic experts of the two sides and has the mandate to study the potential factors for expanding bilateral trade and economic cooperation and work out a 5-Year Plan for Sino-Indian Trade and Economic Development and to encourage the enterprises of the two sides to strengthen cooperation. Alpana Killawala Chief General Manager Press Release: 2003-2004/1118

