Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, 2002-2003 : Now Available The Reserve Bank of India has published the 58th edition of its "Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India, 2002-2003". The publication contains comprehensive data on operations of Scheduled Commercial Banks (including the Regional Rural Banks), Scheduled Co-operative Banks and Local Area Banks in India for 2002-2003. The data are obtained from the published annual accounts of banks and various important returns received by the Reserve Bank of India. Starting from this year, the scope of this publication has been enhanced by including detailed bank-wise tables on Scheduled Urban Co-operative Banks and Local Area Banks. In addition, nine new tables have been made available. These contain information on sector-wise bank credit, average lending and deposit rates, risk-weighted assets, insured deposits, bank-wise non-performing assets, bank-wise employees, bank-wise stock prices and bank-wise and population group-wise number of offices. The tables are grouped according to subject areas relating to banks, viz., (i) Offices (ii) Business (iii) Liabilities and Assets (iv) Deposits (v) Advances (vi) Priority Sector Advances (vii) Non-performing Assets (viii) Investments (ix) Earning and Expenses (x) Employees and (xi) Miscellaneous. Bank-wise tables covers major components of their liabilities and assets, including contingent liabilities and income and expenditures. Under new disclosure norms, banks (other than the Regional Rural Banks) are now required to publish information on the movements of non-performing assets (NPAs), advances to sensitive sectors, maturity pattern of selected items of liabilities and assets, break-up of provisions and contingencies in the notes to their annual accounts. Such items are also covered in this publication. To facilitate comparison, selected profitability and other important financial ratios of individual banks have also been in a table at the end. The publication is priced at Rs.200 (Rs.250 by registered book post and US $ 50 for overseas despatch). The CD-ROM version of the publication is priced at Rs.200 (Rs.250 by post and US $ 50 by air mail). The Publication can also be accessed through internet at http:/www.rbi.org.in. Copies of the volume/CDs can be obtained from the Director, Division of Reports, Reviews and Publication (Sales Section), Department of Economic Analysis and Policy, Reserve Bank of India, Amar Building (Ground Floor), P.B.No.1036, Mumbai-400 001. Cheques/drafts should be drawn in favour of the "Reserve Bank of India", payable at Mumbai. Users of the CD-ROM are requested to send their comments/suggestions/ questions to helpdbsdesacs@rbi.org.in. P.V.Sadanandan Manager Press Release: 2003-2004/864

