PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 2, 2004
RBI Governor meets Federations of Co-operative Banks
A meeting was held in the Reserve Bank of India today with the representatives of federations
of urban and rural co-operative banks, namely, Shri H K Patil, Chairman, Shri D Krishna, Chief
Executive Officer and Shri M L Abhyankar, Director of the National Federation of Urban Cooperative
Banks and Credit Societies Limited, Shri S N Lohiya, Chairman and Shri Arvind Deshpande, General
Secretary of the Maharastra Urban Cooperative Banks Federation Limited and Dr V Y Tarale,
Secretary, Shri H R Shinde, Honorary Secretary and Shri G R Shelke, Director of the Maharashtra
State Co-operative Banks' Association limited and Shri B Subramaniam, Managing Director, National
Federation of State Cooperative Banks Limited. Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor chaired the meeting. Smt.
K.J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Shri A.V. Sardesai, Executive Director and senior officials of Urban
Banks Department and Rural Planning and Credit Department were also present. The meeting was
organised in the context of current economic scenario and to discuss several issues raised by the
cooperative banking sector in the recent past. It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank, on August
25, 2004, met chief executives of select commercial banks and industry associations to discuss
certain issues with them in the context of emerging economic scenario.
On behalf of the Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs), the participants commented on several
aspects and made a number of suggestions.  Emphasis was laid on the need to ensure level-playing
field to UCBs on par with commercial banks while recognising their unique characteristics.  These
included their co-operative character, predominantly localised operations, many of them serving semi-
urban and agro oriented activities, underlying spirit of community, a large base of small depositors
and above all, the criticality of directors of UCBs who had a stake in the growth of these banks. They
urged that inherent limitations in the current institutional framework of the co-operative banks in terms
of their shares not being listed or their inability to raise tier II capital should also be considered while
prescribing the regulations.  They wanted that the Reserve Bank should assure support to UCBs
when there were problems, as it did to commercial banks.  In any case, the participants pleaded for
some immediate relief from the Reserve Bank by giving them adequate time to restructure their
accounts and progressively meet stricter prudential norms.  Incidentally, the participants also urged
that Basel II norms might not be applied to UCBs as it is but in a modified form to suit the localised
nature of the UCBs. They thanked the Governor for the consultative approach of the Reserve Bank
and desired that it be intensified and made more frequent.
Specific suggestions in regard to modifications of prudential regulations included deferment of
provisioning and application of 90-day norm, exclusion of gold
loans and loans below Rs.1 lakh from these norms, rationalisation of procedures governing
maintenance of CRR and mechanical grading of UCBs on the basis of violations; permitting inter bank
deposits among co-operative banks upto a limit in lieu of or similar to call money for commercial
banks; relaxations in restrictions on loans to directors; review of dividend pay-out restrictions to impart
automaticity for consistently profit making UCBs; revision of valuation norms for government securities
held under SLR; continuation of the existing regulations on NPA in respect of State level guarantees;
review of procedures relating to trading; and extending facility of bank assurance to more UCBs rather
than only to those with net worth of Rs.100 crore.
There was also a suggestion to allow private insurance of deposits over Rs.1 lakh through
legal changes if need be.  Suggestions were made to ensure that administrator appointed in respect
of weak banks was drawn from other stronger co-operative banks and perhaps even a committee of
administrators against a single administrator. The participants felt that in view of the potential for
growth, as evidenced by spurt in deposits of UCBs, a vision should be developed for removing2
existing infirmities, strengthening the financial position, expanding to other States where they
were not active and thus defining the future role of UCBs.
Concerns were also expressed at the state of health of State and District Co-operative banks
and in this regard it was noted that recommendations of several committees remained
unimplemented.  Major challenges identified were - reconciling democratic character and financial
discipline among these institutions through resolving long pending legal issues; ensuring democratic
functioning; making available resources at low interest rates, say three per cent below the Bank Rate;
and some regulatory prescriptions by NABARD.
The Governor noted the procedural and regulatory issues that might be addressed by the
Reserve Bank. He assured that UCBs would be provided with reasonable opportunity and justifiable
time to comply with regulatory prescriptions considered appropriate to UCBs from time to time. He
also indicated that in matters that need to be taken up with State and Central Governments, the
Reserve Bank would take a view at the earliest and pursue with them.  In regard to structural issues,
he felt that some analytical work would need to be done internally.  He disclosed that the consultative
mechanism already in place in respect of UCBs in the form of a Standing Advisory Committee would
be activated and further strengthened. The Governor endorsed the idea of evolving a vision for the
future role of UCBs which must ensure depositors’ interests and avoid contagion while providing
useful service to local communities.
As regards issues relating to SCBs, DCCBs and NABARD, the Governor assured that the
recently constituted Task Force would address the issues comprehensively and the Reserve Bank
was keen on a regulatory framework and a revival plan that addresses the overhang issues while
ensuring a vibrant future for this sector.  He preferred a consultative approach in this regard also.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-05/251