PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box
406, Mumbai 400001 RESERVE BANK OF
INDIA
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
RBI On Internet:
http://www.rbi.org.in
Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in
February 23, 2004
Launching of Market Stabilisation Scheme
Following the recommendations contained in the Report of the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) Working Group on Instruments of Sterilisation submitted in December 2003,
the Government of India has confirmed its intention to strengthen the Reserve Bank in
its ability to conduct exchange rate and monetary management operations in a manner
that would maintain stability in the foreign exchange market and enable it to conduct
monetary policy in accordance with its stated objectives.
In this regard the Reserve Bank has proposed to the Government of India to
authorise issuance of existing debt instruments, viz., Treasury Bills and dated securities
up to a specified ceiling to be mutually agreed upon between the Government and the
Reserve Bank by way of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) under the Market
Stabilisation Scheme (MSS).  The bills/bonds issued under MSS would have all the
attributes of the existing Treasury Bills and dated securities.  The bills and securities will
be issued by way of auctions to be conducted by the Reserve Bank.  The Reserve Bank
will decide and notify the amount, tenure and timing of issuance of such treasury bills
and dated securities. Whenever such securities are issued by the Reserve Bank for the
purpose of market stabilisation and sterilisation, a press release at the time of issue
would indicate such purpose.  For the present, the total outstanding obligations of the
Government by way of bills/securities thus issued under the MSS from time to time
would not exceed Rs. 60,000 crore.
The bills and securities issued for the purpose of MSS would be matched by an
equivalent cash balance held by the Government with the Reserve Bank. Thus, there will
only be a marginal impact on revenue and fiscal deficits of the Government to the extent
of interest payment on bills/securities outstanding under the MSS.  Further, the cost
would be shown separately in the Budget. This would add transparency to the cost of
sterilisation.
It may be noted that, as mentioned in the Reserve Bank’s Report of the Internal
Group on Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), the intention of introducing MSS is
essentially to differentiate the liquidity absorption of a more enduring nature by way of
sterilisation from the day-to-day normal liquidity management operations. The total
absorption of liquidity from the system by the Reserve Bank will continue to be in line
with the monetary policy stance from time to time and accordingly, the liquidity
absorption will get apportioned among the instruments of LAF, MSS and normal open
market operations (OMOs).
P. V. Sadanandan
           Manager
Press Release: 2003-2004/1014