`
œÏ½¬¸ œÏˆÅ¸©¸›¸ú PRESS RELEASE
ž¸¸£÷¸ú¡¸ ¹£{¸¨¸Ä ?¸ÿˆÅ
œÏ½¬¸ ¬¸Ÿœ¸ˆÄÅ œÏž¸¸Š¸, ˆ½½¿ÅÍú¡¸ ˆÅ¸¡¸¸Ä¥¸¡¸, œ¸¸½¬’ ?¸¸ÁÆ¬¸ 406, Ÿ¸º¿¿?¸ƒÄ 400 001
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
ûÅ¸½›¸À 2266 0502 û¾ÅÆ¬¸À 2266 0358, 2270 3279
www.rbi.org.in
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
December 23, 2004
Report on Currency and Finance, 2003-04
Theme: Monetary Policy
The Reserve Bank of India today released its Report on Currency and
Finance, 2003-04. The theme of the Report is “Monetary Policy”. Last year’s Report
(2002-03) made a comprehensive review of the Management of the External Sector
in an Open Economy Framework.
Introduction
The conduct of monetary policy has been changing in response to the
process of financial liberalisation. Increasing volume of cross-border trade in goods
and services as well as financial flows encouraged by forces of globalisation have
enhanced inter-dependence in monetary policy formulation across countries. Sharp
swings in capital flows and volatile exchange rate movements have emerged as key
concerns in monetary management in the emerging economies. Financial
innovations have also induced a significant transformation in the operating
procedures of monetary management. Concomitantly, there is now a growing
recognition of the need to impart central banks with a greater degree of
independence especially from the budgetary compulsions of the Governments in
order to stabilise inflationary expectations for ensuring price stability.
In India, the conduct of monetary policy in the recent years has been shaped
by wide-ranging structural reforms during the 1990s. This necessitated significant
changes in the monetary policy framework in terms of objectives, instruments and
targets. The change had to be dovetailed with a simultaneous process of evolution
of financial markets in consonance with the aim of enhancing allocative efficiency
through the process of price discovery. At the heart of monetary reforms lies the
containment of the fiscal dominance of monetary policy. With the opening up of the
economy, monetary management had to increasingly contend with challenges
emanating from the large volume and sudden switches in capital flows and
episodes of volatility in the financial markets. In this milieu, while price stability and
credit availability remained twin objectives of monetary policy, financial stability
has gradually emerged as an additional consideration in the conduct of monetary
policy.
Against this backdrop, this Report is focused on the theme of “Monetary
Policy”. The Report contains nine Chapters. While the focus of the Report is the evolution of
monetary policy in India and the challenges facing it, different chapters present thesedevelopments against the recent theoretical developments in the field of monetary economics
and the accumulated cross-country empirical evidence. Chapter I introduces the theme of the
Report. As a prelude to the substantive theme based discussions, Chapter II of the Report titled
“Recent Economic Developments” provides an analytical account of macroeconomic
developments in the Indian economy during the year 2004-05 so far. In the theme-based
discussions, Chapter III titled “Monetary Policy Framework: An Analytical Overview” covers
issues relating to objectives, intermediate targets and operating procedures of monetary policy.
Chapter IV of the Report – “Monetary Policy in an Open Economy” - focuses on the challenges
that external openness imposes upon the conduct of monetary policy. Chapter V entitled
“Monetary Policy and Inflation” undertakes an assessment of monetary policy in achieving its
primary objective, viz., inflation. Issues related to the role of bank credit in the conduct of
monetary policy are discussed in Chapter VI entitled “Bank Credit”. Monetary policy is known to
operate with long and variable lags and issues of the transmission mechanism are covered in
Chapter VII – “Monetary Transmission Mechanism”. Given the increasing concerns over
financial instability in a globalising economy, Chapter VIII - “Financial Stability” - undertakes a
discussion of key issues in regard to financial stability. The final Chapter of the Report –
“Assessment of Monetary Policy”- presents an overall assessment on the key issues and
challenges in the conduct of monetary policy, with special reference to India.
Recent Economic Developments
Developments during 2004-05 so far reaffirm the growing resilience of the Indian
economy. The economy continued to be buffeted by exogenous shocks emanating from the
monsoon conditions and international oil prices. Notwithstanding the adverse impact of these
shocks, the Indian economy exhibited remarkable stability. A heartening feature of 2004-05 has
been the further entrenchment of the growth momentum in the industrial sector. Structural
reforms since early 1990s, the opening up of the economy and corporate restructuring have
increased the competitiveness of the Indian industry. This is also reflected in the robust
merchandise export growth recorded during the year so far. Various business confidence
surveys indicate a degree of optimism in regard to future growth prospects of the industrial
sector in a broad-based manner. The increase in bank credit to industry is also suggestive of the
revival of investment demand in the economy. The upturn in industry has been duly supported
by the services sector. On the current reckoning, the overall GDP growth for the year 2004-05 is
expected to be in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 per cent, assuming that the combined downside risks of
high and uncertain oil prices, and sudden changes in international liquidity environment remain
manageable. India would thus remain among the faster growing economies in the world in 2004-
05.
Monetary management during 2004-05 faced challenges primarily on two counts:
overhang of liquidity and the surge in headline inflation. The magnitude and persistence of
supply shocks turned out to be more than what was anticipated. As the overall assessment of
the inflation scenario indicated that it was largely supply-induced, calibrated measures were
undertaken to stabilise inflationary expectations. Although year-on-year WPI inflation, at 7.0 per
cent on December 04, 2004 was still high, the balance of risks has tilted downward with the
recent easing of oil and other commodity prices, improved rabi prospects, fiscal measures
undertaken to dampen price rise and the measures to impound liquidity. As indicated in the Mid-
Term Review of the Annual Policy in October 2004, assuming that there would be no further
major supply shocks and liquidity conditions remain manageable, the point-to-point WPI inflation
at end-March could be around 6.5 per cent.
Domestic financial markets have generally been stable, even as yields across various
markets edged up. The strong fundamentals of the economy have led to a rally in the stock
markets in the recent months. Financial sector has strengthened further. Notwithstanding thesharp rise in oil imports, the balance of payments position remained comfortable and the foreign
exchange reserves have increased by US $ 16.7 billion during 2004-05 so far (up to December
10, 2004).
Monetary Policy Framework: An Analytical Overview
It is now widely agreed that monetary policy can contribute to sustainable economic
growth by maintaining low and stable inflation. Within this overall objective of price stability,
central banks attempt to stabilise output around its potential. Financial innovations have
impacted upon the conduct of monetary policy and central banks, therefore, prefer to monitor a
range of macroeconomic indictors, which carry information about the ultimate objectives. Short-
term interest rates have emerged as operative target/instrument of monetary policy. Along with
these developments, central banks have strengthened their balance sheets in order to be able
to meet unforeseen contingencies that may arise from their market operations.
In India, the opening up of the economy in the early 1990s had a significant impact upon
the conduct of monetary policy. While price stability and adequate availability of credit remain
two key objectives, the growing integration of the Indian economy with the global economy has
led to financial stability emerging as a key consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. In
order to meet challenges thrown by financial liberalisation and the growing complexities of
monetary management, the Reserve Bank switched from a monetary targeting framework to a
multiple indicator approach. Short-term interest rates have emerged as signals of monetary
policy stance. In line with international trends, the Reserve Bank has now put in place a liquidity
management framework in which market liquidity is now modulated through a mix of open
market (including repo) operations and changes in reserve requirements and standing facilities,
reinforced by changes in the policy rates. These arrangements have been quite effective in the
recent years in managing liquidity in the system, especially in the context of persistent capital
flows. The introduction of the Market Stabilisation Scheme has provided further flexibility to the
Reserve Bank in its market operations. Given the random nature of the shocks hitting the
economy, central banks are increasingly acting as shock absorbers. In order to manage these
shocks effectively, a constant innovation is required by central banks in terms of instruments
and operating procedures while strengthening their balance sheets.
Monetary Policy in an Open Economy
The decade of the 1990s has witnessed the further spread of globalisation. Higher trade
and financial openness can increase cross-linkages and interdependence between economies.
Monetary policy authorities are, therefore, required to make an assessment of these
developments on domestic output and inflation in formulation of their policies. Boom-bust pattern
of capital flows to the EMEs has brought into sharp focus the constraints imposed by the
‘impossible trinity’. In the process, the central banks in these economies have mainly relied on
sterilisation as the policy response and build-up substantial reserves in episodes of punitive
capital flows.
Like other EMEs, India too has attracted large capital flows, the effect of which has been
augmented, in recent years, by surpluses in the current account. Capital flows have been largely
stable, reflecting a cautious approach to capital account liberalisation. Nonetheless, there have
been a few episodes of volatility in capital flows. Overall, however, the period since 1993-94 has
witnessed persistent surpluses in balance of payments. External sector developments, have,
therefore, come to influence dynamics of monetary base and monetary aggregates. A multi-
pronged approach has been followed to manage the external flows to ensure domesticeconomic and financial stability. The key features of the package of measures include:
liberalisation of policies in regard to capital account outflows; encouraging pre-payment of
external borrowings; alignment of interest rates on non-resident deposits; greater flexibility in
exchange rate; and, sterilisation operations. Operations involving sterilisation are undertaken in
the context of a policy response which has to be viewed as a package encompassing exchange
rate policy, level of reserves, interest rate policy along with considerations related to domestic
liquidity, financial market conditions as a whole, and degree of openness of the economy.
Monetary Policy and Inflation
During the past two decades, a large number of developed and developing economies
have seen a significant reduction in inflation.  Overall, improvements in the institutional setup of
monetary policy - independent central banks, better communication strategies, increased
transparency, improved techniques – have been a key factor contributing to low and stable
inflation although the relative role of monetary policy per se in containing inflation continues to
be matter of debate. Prudent fiscal policies, structural reforms, productivity growth, deregulation,
globalisation and competition have also contributed in achieving the low inflation environment. A
reversal in the trend of any of these above factors can, in turn, be a threat to this low inflation
environment. The experience with inflation targeting frameworks is evolving – both inflation
targeting (IT) and non-IT countries have been successful in reducing inflation during the 1990s.
However, a stylised fact of the 1990s has been that not only IT countries but even non-IT
countries have also been able to reduce inflation. The jury is still out on the extent to which
inflation targeting policies have actually contributed to the reduction in inflation that has
occurred.
In India, inflation increased from the 1970s onwards before moderating in mid-1990s.
Expansionary fiscal policy during the 1980s and its monetisation were a major cause of the
increase in inflation. Structural reforms since the early 1990s coupled with improved monetary-
fiscal interface and reforms in government securities markets enabled better monetary
management from the second half of the 1990s onwards. The success with achieving and
maintaining low inflation in India since mid-1990s has led to a number of positive developments.
First, there is virtually a national consensus that high inflation is not good and that it should be
brought down. Second, inflation expectations have come down and, consequently, inflation
tolerance has also come down.
Bank Credit
Empirical evidence confirms a positive relationship between finance and growth. In
developing economies like India, with bank-based financial system, bank credit plays a critical
role in the growth process. In India, with the initiation of structural reforms in the early 1990s, the
focus shifted from micro-regulation of credit to macro-management. Over the last decade, the
efforts of the Reserve Bank have mainly concentrated on improving the credit delivery
mechanism to various sectors of the economy. The policy endeavour has been to reduce
various information and transaction costs associated with lending so that increased flow of credit
takes place at reasonable rate of interest. Analysis suggests that these efforts to improve credit
delivery have had a positive effect in the past few years. Credit flow to the agricultural sector has
recovered sharply in the last 3-4 years. Credit flow to industrial sector by banks has also been
maintained. However, the issue of meeting long-term funding needs of corporates has attracted
attention. The ability of commercial banks to meet the long-term fund requirements is hampered
by the relatively shorter maturity of their deposits as well as by the fact that banks are already
holding large volumes of government paper, usually of long tenors. This stresses the need todevelop an active corporate bond market in the country. Given the growth and employment
potential of small-scale units, there is a need to increase credit availability to this sector at
reasonable costs. The flow of credit to the various sectors of the economy could be improved
further if banks can contain their operating costs and further improve the loan recovery.
The structural reforms during the 1990s, inter alia, attempted to enhance the credit flow
to the private sector through reductions in statutory pre-emptions. Fiscal consolidation as
envisaged in the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act is expected to reduce
government’s draft on the banking system and, therefore, this is expected to increase the flow of
credit to the commercial sector with beneficial effects on investment demand, output and
employment in the economy.
Monetary Transmission Mechanism
Monetary policy actions affect output and prices with long and variable lags. Despite
substantial progress, there is still no unanimity on the precise channels of monetary
transmission and these remain a “black-box”. A few stylised facts that emerge from a survey of
recent cross-country studies are: (i) pass-through from monetary policy signals to bank lending
rates is only partial in the short-run; (ii) output displays a hump-shaped response to monetary
policy shocks; and, (iii) prices are quite sluggish - almost unchanged for one year and it can take
almost two years for monetary policy to have a noticeable effect on prices, although some
evidence suggests that, in the case of emerging economies, the lags may be somewhat shorter.
With structural reforms and financial liberalisation, monetary transmission channels in
India have undergone a significant transformation. Monetary policy stance is now being
increasingly signalled through variations in key policy interest rates. Although rigidities in the
financial system have blunted the pass-through from policy rates to bank determined rates,
there is some evidence of an improvement in the pass-through in recent years. This has been
possible through concerted efforts of the Reserve Bank to impart greater flexibility to the interest
rate structure. Concomitantly, this has also enabled a moderation in real lending rates for
borrowers over time. This is expected to have a positive effect on investment demand in the
economy.
Financial Stability
The conventional view is that price stability is a sufficient condition for financial stability.
Developments during the 1990s suggest that this may not be the case, at least in the short-run.
Ironically, price stability itself may lead to “irrational exuberance” which could over time be
reflected in financial imbalances. Thus, although central banks have always been concerned
with maintenance of financial stability, recent developments have placed renewed emphasis on
financial stability as an objective of monetary policy. Apart from lengthening their monetary
policy horizons beyond the usual two-year framework, central banks can contribute to financial
stability through regulation and supervision ensuring that banks are well-capitalised and well-
diversified. Encouraging more transparency in accounting and disclosure practices can also
contribute to financial stability.
In India, prudential norms have been gradually brought on par with international
standards and best practices, with suitable country specific adaptations. More recently, the
Reserve Bank has undertaken significant initiatives towards graduating towards Basel II,
keeping in view the country-specific requirements. India’s approach to financial sector reforms
has served the country well, in terms of aiding growth, avoiding crises, enhancing efficiency andimparting resilience to the system.  The development of financial markets has been, by and
large, healthy.  Since the initiation of reforms, financial health as well as efficiency of the banking
sector has improved. From the vantage point of 2004, one of the successes of the Indian
financial sector reform has been the maintenance of financial stability and avoidance of any
major financial crisis during the reform period - a period that has been turbulent for the financial
sector in most emerging market countries.
Assessment of Monetary Policy
To conclude, structural reforms initiated in the Indian economy in the early 1990s had a
significant impact on the conduct of monetary policy in terms of its objectives, strategies and
tactics. An assessment of monetary management since early 1990s shows that monetary policy
has been reasonably successful in meeting its key objectives - price stability, flow of credit to
productive sectors and ensuring financial stability. In assessing the conduct of monetary policy
during the recent years, it needs to be stressed that during this period, the Indian economy
witnessed a large number of shocks, both global and domestic. These shocks included a series
of financial crisis in Asia, Brazil and Russia, September 11 terrorist attacks in the US, border
tensions, sanctions imposed in the aftermath of nuclear tests, political uncertainties and
changes in the Government. Monetary policy in India had to manage all such shocks, and,
viewed in this light, the success in maintaining price and financial stability is all the more
credible. In this regard, it needs to be noted that financial stability does not exclude interest rate
cycles. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has been preparing market participants for these cycles
and they have also been advised to hedge their exposures.
As the international experience indicates, a prudent fiscal policy remains the single
largest pre-requisite for monetary stability. Reforms in the monetary-fiscal interface during the
1990s have been a key factor that imparted greater flexibility to monetary policy. These reforms
have taken a significant step forward with the enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Act, 2003. Strict adherence to these fiscal rules in letter and spirit will help to
stabilise inflation expectations and, in turn, keep inflation low and stable in the country while
gradually providing increasing flexibility to the Reserve Bank.
Fiscal discipline creates enabling conditions for monetary and financial stability.
Monetary policy will have, however, still to grapple with uncertainty in the environment it
operates. Uncertainty about how economies operate and about monetary policy itself is,
however, no excuse for not pursuing price stability. An environment of sustained low and stable
inflation is conducive for financial savings, with beneficial impact on investment in the economy
and for sustained growth and employment. Price stability is all the more important for an
economy like India, with a large proportion of poor population that has no hedges against
inflation.
"The findings, views, and conclusions expressed in this Report are entirely those of the
contributing staff of the Department of Economic Analysis and Policy (DEAP) and should not
necessarily be interpreted as the official views of the Reserve Bank of India."
  Alpana Killawala
                            Chief General manager  
Press Release: 2004-05/656