PRESS RELEASE 
9 
 
 
 
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post 
RESERVE BANK 
Box 406, Mumbai 400001 
OF INDIA  
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279  
RBI On Internet: 
 
http://www.rbi.org.in 
Email: helpprd@rbi.org.in 
 
January 31, 2004 
 
Revised Guidelines on External Commercial Borrowings 
 
With a view to promote investment in the real sector - industrial sector, 
especially infrastructure - in India and enable corporates to access resources 
from overseas lenders at competitive rates, the policy of external commercial 
borrowings (ECB) has been reviewed recently. In view of the need to replace the 
temporary measures introduced recently with stable, transparent and simplified 
policies and procedures, the review was undertaken based on the current 
macroeconomic situation, challenges faced in external sector management and 
the experience gained so far in administering the ECB policy.  
 
2. The Automatic Route has been considerably liberalised for corporates, 
other than financial intermediaries.   All loans for investment in industrial, 
infrastructure sector and for acquisition of shares under the Government’s 
disinvestment programme of PSU shares up to US $ 500 million having minimum 
average maturity of 5 years are covered under the Automatic Route.  In other 
words, such loans do not require prior approval of either Reserve Bank of India 
or Government of India. Within this category, loans up to US $20 million with 
minimum average maturity of 3 years are also covered.  
 
3. Under the Approval Route, among the categories of ECB covered are:  (i) 
financial institutions dealing exclusively with infrastructure or export finance, (ii) 
banks and financial institutions which had participated in the textile or steel sector 
restructuring package approved by the Government and based on assessment of 
prudential norms by RBI, and (iii) cases falling outside the purview of the 
automatic route. 
 
4. The all-in-cost ceilings have been fixed at 200 basis points and 350 basis 
points over six months LIBOR for ECB of minimum average maturity of 3 – 5 
years and more than 5 years, respectively.  
 
5. The borrower is required to comply with the reporting arrangements. The 
primary responsibility to ensure that ECB raised / utilised are in conformity with 
the ECB guidelines issued by Government and the 
regulations/directions/circulars issued by Reserve Bank, is that of the concerned 
borrower.  
6. For providing greater transparency, information with regard to the name of 
the borrower, amount, purpose and maturity of ECB will be put on the RBI 
website.  
  
7. The revised guidelines relating to ECB are put on the RBI website 
and will come into effect from February 1, 2004. 
 
 
P. V. Sadanandan 
Manager 
Press Release: 2003-2004/931 
 