PRESS RELEASE
`
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
PRESS RELATIONS DIVISION, Central Office, Post Box 406, Mumbai 400001
www.rbi.org.in\hindi
Phone: 2266 0502 Fax: 2266 0358,  2270 3279
e-mail: helpprd@rbi.org.in
September 17, 2004
RBI meets RNBCs
A meeting was held with Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs) today in
the Reserve Bank of India. Dr. Y V Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank chaired the
meeting which was attended by Smt. K J Udeshi, Deputy Governor and Smt.
Shyamala Gopinath, Executive Director along with other senior officials of the Reserve
Bank. RNBCs were represented by Shri Subrata Roy, Managing Director, Sahara
Indian Financial Corporation Limited, Shri S K Roy, Managing Director of Peerless
General Finance and Investment Company Limited, Shri G Janardhan Reddy,
Managing Director of Ennoble Savings and Investment Company Limited.  Earlier, the
Reserve Bank had held similar meetings with scheduled commercial banks and their
industry association as also with urban cooperative banks.
The participants from RNBCs appreciated the opportunity to meet with the
Reserve Bank officials and considered the gesture as a recognition of importance
attached to RNBCs. They emphasised that they are reaching out to areas and people
who are not usually covered by the financial system.  They added that RNBCs play a
very useful role by mobilising resources for the economy while providing employment
on a large scale. They further added that while their performance has been good, the
RBI Directions issued recently have made their functioning difficult.
They contended that restriction of discretionary investments will affect their
survival. RNBCs also raised the issues relating to other stipulations, viz., additional
investment in Government securities, risk weight on exposure to public financial
institutions (PFIs) which are rated AA+ and above, permission to invest a part of the
deposit funds in the equity oriented mutual fund schemes, capital charge on account of
downgrading of rating of the debt instruments below AA+, etc.
The Governor noted the achievements made by RNBC, their current role and
emerging issues, as presented by the participants.  He explained the ongoing efforts of
the Reserve Bank to strengthen regulatory framework and in this regard, he narrated
the special features of RNBCs namely, the large size of deposits with systemic
implications, the high concentration ratio with two RNBCs accounting for almost all of
the deposits and a major part of all public deposits mobilised by non-banking finance
companies in the country and the very high growth rates in public deposits in the
RNBC sector relative to the financial system as a whole warranting close scrutiny. He
assured that the Reserve Bank will examine various operational suggestions made in
the meeting in regard to smoothening the transition to compliance with the Directions
issued recently.  He added that any modifications that are warranted would be
considered on merit consistent with the basic objectives of such Directions.  He added
that the overall agenda for improvements in the financial system includes several
aspects.  In regard to RNBCs in particular, he reiterated the need for improvements in
regard to transparency, especially the connected lending relationships, corporate
governance standards including professionalisation of the Boards and ensuring “fit and
proper” keeping in view the standards in banks with appropriate adaptation, avoidance2
of untenable rates of commission to agents, strict adherence to ‘know your customer’
rules through systems consistent with their business but subject to regulator’s close
oversight, customer service in terms of clear indication of the identifiable contact with
the field agents, the need to convince the regulator that appropriate systems are in
place in all points of transaction between the depositor and the RNBC including
intermediating agencies, exploring the other related matters, such as, unclaimed
deposits. He noted with appreciation the assurance given by the RNBCs that all the
operational issues will be resolved to the satisfaction of RBI. The Governor also noted
the request of RNBCs to liberally permit discretionary investments and their offer to
accept special guidelines as well as procedures in regard to approvals of such
liberalised discretionary investments.
Alpana Killawala
Chief General Manager
Press Release: 2004-2005/315